

=== SIDE 1 ===



=== SIDE 2 ===

Brief Contents
 26 Introduction to Viruses 6 1 0
 27 Prokaryotes 627
 28 The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes 6 4 7
 29 Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 6 7 2
 30 Seed Plants 690
 31 Introduction to Fungi 708
 32 An Introduction to Animal Diversity 7 2 7
 33 Invertebrates 740
 34 Vertebrates 7 7 2
 1 Biology and Its Themes 50
Unit 1    THE ROLE OF CHEMISTRY  
IN BIOLOGY 75
 2 Atoms and Molecules 7 6
 3 The Chemistry of Water 92
 4 Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 104
 5 Biological Macromolecules and Lipids 1 1 4
 6 Energy and Life 1 4 1
Unit 2   CELL BIOLOGY 162
 7 Cell Structure and Function 1 6 3
 8 Cell Membranes 196
 9 Cellular Signaling 2 1 4
 10 Cell Respiration 236
 11 Photosynthetic Processes 259
 12 Mitosis 284
Unit 3   THE GENETIC BASIS OF LIFE 303
 13 Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 304
 14 Mendelian Genetics 3 1 9
 15 Linkage and Chromosomes 3 4 4
 16 Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 364
 17 Expression of Genes 385
 18 Control of Gene Expression 4 1 5
 19 DNA Technology 449
 20 The Evolution of Genomes 4 7 6
Unit 4   EVOLUTION 501
 21 How Evolution Works 502
 22 Phylogenetic Reconstruction 521
 23 Microevolution 542
 24 Species and Speciation 562
 25 Macroevolution 581
Unit 5   THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE 609
Unit 6    PLANTS: STRUCTURE  
AND FUNCTION 811
 35 Plant Structure and Growth 8 1 2
 36 Transport in V ascular Plants 838
 37 Plant Nutrition 859
 38 Reproduction of Flowering Plants 8 7 6
 39 Plant Signals and Behavior 896
Unit 7    ANIMALS: STRUCTURE  
AND FUNCTION 926
 40 The Animal Body 927
 41 Chemical Signals in Animals 953
 42 Animal Digestive Systems 9 7 4
 43 Animal Transport Systems 997
 44 Animal Excretory Systems 1029
 45 Animal Reproductive Systems 1 0 5 1
 46 Development in Animals 1 0 7 5
 47 Animal Defenses Against Infection 1 1 0 0
 48 Electrical Signals in Animals 1 125
 49 Neural Regulation in Animals 1 143
 50 Sensation and Movement in Animals 1 165
Unit 8   THE ECOLOGY OF LIFE 1197
 51 An Overview of Ecology 1 198
 52 Behavioral Ecology 1225
 53 Populations and Life History Traits 1248
 54 Biodiversity and Communities 1272
 55 Energy Flow and Chemical Cycling in 
Ecosystems 1296
 56 Conservation and Global Ecology 1 3 1 8
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   1 26/03/20   12:10 PM
,

=== SIDE 3 ===

Students: Campbell offers many 
tools to help you succeed
Access your text anywhere with 
the Pearson eText
Strengthen your knowledge in
the Mastering Biology Study Area
Prepare for your exams with
the Dynamic Study Modules
Use the tools in Biology and Mastering Biology 
to create a Study Plan. Y our Study Plan  
might include:
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   2 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 4 ===

Rebecca B. Orr
COLLIN COLLEGE, PLANO, TEXAS
Steven A. Wasserman
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,  
SAN DIEGO
Peter V. Minorsky
MERCY COLLEGE, DOBBS FERRY, 
NEW YORK
Michael L. Cain
NEW MEXICO STATE UNIVERSITY
Lisa A. Urry
MILLS COLLEGE, OAKLAND, 
CALIFORNIA
T W E L F T H  E D I T I O N  
BIOLOGYA Global Approach
Neil A. Campbell
GLOBAL EDITION
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   3 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 5 ===

Pearson Education Limited
KAO Two
KAO Park
Harlow
CM17 9SR
United Kingdom
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide W eb at: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited, 2021
The rights of Neil A. Campbell, Lisa A. Urry, Michael L. Cain, Steven A. Wasserman, Peter V . Minorsky, and Rebecca 
B. Orr to be identified as the authors of this work have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Campbell Biology, 12th edition, ISBN 9780135188743, by Lisa 
A. Urry, Michael L. Cain, Steven A. W asserman, Peter V . Minorsky, and Rebecca B. Orr, published by Pearson Education © 2021.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior 
written permission of the publisher or a license permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does 
not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such 
trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners. For information regarding 
permissions, request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights and  
Permissions department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions. 
This eBook is a standalone product and may or may not include all assets that were part of the print version. It also 
does not provide access to other Pearson digital products like MyLab and Mastering. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove any material in this eBook at any time.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Print ISBN 10: 1-292-34163-7
Print ISBN 13: 978-1-292-34163-7
eBook ISBN 13: 978-1-292-34169-9
Content Producers, Mastering Biology: Kaitlin Smith, 
Ashley Gordon
Supervising Media Producer: Tod Regan
Media Producer: Ziki Dekel
Managing Producer, Media Production,  
Global Edition: Vikram Medepalli
Assistant Media Editor, Global Edition: Aditee Agarwal
Full-Service Vendor: Integra Software Services, Inc.
Design Manager: Mark Ong
Cover Designer: SPi Global 
Interior Designer: Jeff Puda
Illustrators: Lachina Creative
Rights & Permissions Project Manager: Matt Perry, 
SPi!Global
Rights & Permissions Manager: Ben Ferrini
Photo Researcher: Maureen Spuhler
Product and Solutions Specialist: Kelly Galli
Senior Product Marketing Manager: Alysun Estes
Manufacturing Buyer: Stacey W einberger, LSC 
Communications
Senior Manufacturing Buyer, Global Edition: Caterina 
Pellegrino
Cover Photo Credit: sutlafk/Shutterstock
Director, Global Higher Ed Content Management and 
Strategy, Science & Health Sciences: Jeanne Zalesky
Manager, Higher Ed Global Content Strategy, Life 
Sciences: Joshua Frost
Associate Content Analyst: Chelsea Noack
Editorial Assistant: Ashley Fallon
Director, Higher Ed Product Management, 
Life!Sciences:!Michael Gillespie
Product Manager: Rebecca Berardy Schwartz
Managing Producer: Michael Early
Senior Content Producer: Lori Newman
Director, Content Development & Partner 
Relationships: Ginnie Simione Jutson
Supervising Editors: Beth N. Winickoff, Pat Burner
Senior Developmental Editors: John Burner, Mary Ann 
Murray, Hilair Chism, Andrew Recher, Mary Hill
Senior Acquisitions Editor, Global Edition: Aaditya Bugga
Senior Project Editor, Global Edition: Amrita Naskar
Associate Project Editor, Global Edition: Shaoni  Mukherjee
Assistant Project Editor, Global Edition: Aman Kumar
Specialist, Instructional Design and Development: 
Sarah Y oung-Dualan
Senior Content Developer, Mastering Biology: Sarah!Jensen
Project Manager: Katie Cook
Typeset by Integra Software Services
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   4 25/04/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 6 ===

  5
Biology: A Global Approach, 12th Edition, delivers an authoritative, 
accurate, current, and pedagogically innovative experience that helps students 
make connections so they learn and understand biology. This edition presents 
new, engaging visual and digital resources that meet demonstrated student needs.
Setting the Standard for Excellence, 
Accuracy, and Innovation
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   5 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 7 ===

6 
A New Visual Experience for  
Every Chapter
NEW! Chapter Openers introduce each chapter and feature a question 
answered with a clear, simple image to help students visualize and remember 
concepts as they move through each chapter. Each opener includes a Study 
Tip and highlights of interactive media in Mastering Biology.
385
Figure 17.1 A population of albino donkeys grazes on vegetation on the hillsides 
of Asinara, an Italian island. Several centuries ago, a recessive mutation that disables 
pigment synthesis arose in the DNA of one donkey and was passed down through 
the generations. Inbreeding has resulted in a large number of homozygous albino 
donkeys living on the island today.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 17
• BioFlix® Animation: Protein Synthesis
• Figure 17.27 Walkthrough: Types of 
Small-Scale Mutations that Affect mRNA 
Sequence
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Protein Synthesis 
• Tutorial: CRISPR: A Revolution in 
Genome Editing
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module 
• 
17.1 Genes specify proteins via 
transcription and translation p. 386
17.2 Transcription is the DNA-directed 
synthesis of RNA: A Closer Look 
17.3 Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after 
transcription p. 395
17.4 Translation is the RNA-directed 
synthesis of a polypeptide: A Closer 
Look p. 397
17.5 Mutations of one or a few 
nucleotides can affect protein 
structure and function p. 407
KEY CONCEPTS
Expression of Genes17
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Sketch the 
process shown below, and add labels 
and details as you read the chapter. 
take place in a eukaryotic cell.)
How can one change in DNA result in such
a dramatic change in appearance?
Proteins are the link between genotype and phenotype. Gene expression
is the process by which DNA directs the synthesis of proteins:
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
mRNAmRNA
Protein: Enzyme 
required for pigment 
synthesis
Protein: Enzyme 
required for pigment 
synthesis does not work
Genotype: DNA Genotype: DNA
Gene for pigmentation Gene for pigmentation
with mutation
Phenotype:
Brown pigment
Phenotype:
No pigment
NEW! A Visual 
Overview helps 
students start with the 
big picture.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   6 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 8 ===

  7
Figure 39.1 Sunﬂowers track the sun from east to west each day. After sunset, 
they reverse direction, facing the direction of the next sunrise. By facing the hot sun 
during the day, the ﬂoral heads become warmer and release greater amounts of 
chemicals that attract pollinators. Light is just one of the many factors to which a 
plant responds.
Plant Signals and Behavior39
Heat
or cold
stress
Internal
chemical
signals
Drought or
ﬂooding
Touch by wind or
objects
Wounding 
by herbivores
Infection 
by pathogens
Time (daylength
and seasons)
Gravity
Light
Hormones
What are some factors that 
plants sense and respond to?
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 39
• Video: Gravitropism
• Video: Mimosa leaves
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: Leaf Abscission
• Activity: Plant Hormones
Study Tip
Make a table: As you read the chapter, 
add speciﬁc examples for each of the 
general categories of responses shown 
in the diagram.
39.1 Signal transduction pathways link 
signal reception to response  p. 897
39.2 Plants use chemicals to 
communicate  p. 899
39.3 Responses to light are critical for 
plant success  p. 909
39.4 Plants respond to a wide variety of 
stimuli other than light  p. 915
39.5 Plants respond to attacks by 
pathogens and herbivores  p. 920
KEY CONCEPTS
Factor
Light Seed germination in response
to red light
Example of plant response
896
NEW! A Study Tip 
provides an activity for 
students to help them 
organize and learn 
the information in the 
chapter.
NEW! Key 
Mastering 
Biology resources 
are highlighted 
for students and 
instructors.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   7 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 9 ===

8 
Pearson eText for Biology: A Whole 
New Reading Experience
BioFlix Animation   Mechanics of breathing
Expanding the thoracic cavity during inhalation involves the 
animal’s rib muscles and the diaphragm     , a sheet of skeletal 
muscle that forms the bottom wall of the cavity. Contracting the rib
i
EXPANDED! 500 
embedded Videos 
& Animations help 
students visualize complex 
biology topics. These 
include: new HHMI 
BioInteractive Videos and 
Animations, new Figure 
Walkthroughs, BioFlix® 3-D 
Animations, Galápagos 
Videos by Peter and 
Rosemary Grant, and more.
NEW! The Pearson eText is a simple-to-use, mobile-optimized, personalized reading experience. It allows 
students to easily highlight, take notes, and review vocabulary all in one place—even when offline. Pearson 
eText for Biology also includes Figure Walkthroughs and 500 videos and animations.
The Pearson eText app is 
available for download 
in the app store for 
approved devices.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   8 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 10 ===

  9
Bringing Innovative Art to Life
NEW! An expanded collection of Figure Walkthroughs guide students through key figures with 
narrated explanations and figure mark-ups that reinforce important points. These are embedded in the 
eText and available for assignment in Mastering Biology.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   9 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 11 ===

10 
NEW! Science in the Classroom presents annotated 
journal articles from the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) and makes reading and 
understanding primary literature easier for students. The 
articles include assessments in Mastering Biology, allowing 
instructors to assign the journal articles.
Gi ving Students the Tools They Need 
to Succeed
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   10 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 12 ===

  11
Make Connections Across Multiple 
Concepts
Make Connections Figures pull together content from different chapters,  
providing a visual representation of “big picture” relationships.
BLOOD
SALT WATER
CHLORIDE
CELLK+
K+
Na+
Na+Cl–
Flagellar
motor
H+
Filament of
ﬂagelluO
HookH2O
Stoma
H2O
H2OH2O
K1
H2O
)uard cells
K1
H1
H1
The transport of ions across the plasma membrane of a 
cell is a fundamental activity of all animals, and indeed 
of all living things. By generating ion gradients, ion 
transport provides the potential energy that powers 
processes ranging from an organism’s regulation of 
salts and gases in internal ﬂuids to its perception of 
and locomotion through its environment.
In marine bony ﬁshes, ion 
gradients drive secretion of salt 
(NaCl), a process essential to avoid 
dehydration. Within gills, the pumps, 
cotransporters, and channels of specialized chloride cells function 
together to drive salt from the blood across the gill epithelium and 
into the surrounding salt water. (See Figure 44.3.)
Ion gradients provide the basis for the opening of  a plant stoma 
by surrounding guard cells. Active transport of H+ out of a guard 
cell generates a voltage (membrane potential) that drives inward 
movement of K+. This uptake of K+ by guard cells triggers an 
osmotic inﬂux of water that changes cell shape, bowing 
the guard cells outward and thereby opening the stoma. (See
Concept 36.4.) 
In neurons, transmission of information as nerve impulses is 
made possible by the opening and closing of channels selective 
for sodium or other ions. These signals enable nervous systems to 
receive and process input and to direct appropriate output, such 
as this leap of a frog capturing prey. (See Concept 48.3 and
Concept 50.5.)
  
A gradient of H+  powers the bacterial ﬂagellum. An electron 
transport chain generates this gradient, establishing a higher 
concentration of H+ outside the bacterial cell. Protons reentering 
the cell provide a force that causes the ﬂagellar motor to rotate. 
The rotating motor turns the curved hook, causing the attached 
ﬁlament to propel the cell. (See Concept 10.4 and Figure 27.7.)
NEURON
Na+
Na+
Channel
open
Channel
closed
Osmoregulation
Information Processing
Gas Exchange
Locomotion
Ion Movement and Gradients
. Figure 44.17
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
 Mastering Biology B ioFlix® Animation: Membrane Transport
Explain why the set of forces driving ion movement across the 
plasma membrane of a cell is described as an electrochemical 
(electrical and chemical) gradient (see Concept 8.4).
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
 CHAPTER 44  Animal Excretory Systems 1045
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   11 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 13 ===

12 
Make Connections 
Questions in every chapter ask 
students to relate content to material 
presented earlier in the course.
Make Connections 
Tutorials connect content 
from two different chapters 
using art from the book. Make 
Connections Tutorials are 
assignable and automatically 
graded in Mastering Biology and 
include answer-specific feedback 
for students.
CONCEPT CHECK 24.2
1. Summarize key differences between allopatric and sympatric 
speciation. Which type of speciation is more common, and why?
2. Describe two mechanisms that can decrease gene ﬂow in 
sympatric populations, thereby making sympatric speciation 
more likely to occur.
3. WHAT IF? Is allopatric speciation more likely to occur on an 
island close to a mainland or on a more isolated island of 
the same size? Explain your prediction.
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the process of meiosis in 
Figure 13.8. Describe how an error during meiosis could lead 
to polyploidy.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   12 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 14 ===

  13
Develop Scientific Skills
Scientific Skills Exercises in 
every chapter of the text use real 
data to build key skills needed for 
biology, including data analysis, 
graphing, experimental design, and 
math skills. Each exercise is also 
available as an automatically graded 
assignment in Mastering Biology 
with answer-specific feedback for 
students.
Scientiﬁc Skills Exercise
Analyzing Polypeptide Sequence Data
Are Rhesus Monkeys or Gibbons More Closely Related to 
Humans? In this exercise, you will look at amino acid sequence data 
for the b polypeptide chain of hemoglobin, often called b-globin. 
You will then interpret the data to hypothesize whether the monkey 
or the gibbon is more closely related to humans.
How Such Experiments Are Done Researchers can isolate the 
polypeptide of interest from an organism and then determine 
the amino acid sequence. More frequently, the DNA of the rel-
evant gene is sequenced, and the amino acid sequence of the 
polypeptide is deduced from the DNA sequence of its gene.
Data from the Experiments In the data below, the letters give 
the sequence of the 146 amino acids in b-globin from humans, 
SpeciesAlignment of Amino Acid Sequences of d-globin
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
VHLTPEEKSA
VHLTPEEKNA
VHLTPEEKSA
PDAVMGNPKV
PDAVMGNPKV
PDAVMGNPKV
ENFRLLGNVL
ENFRLLGNVL
ENFRLLGNVL
VTALWGKVNV
VTTLWGKVNV
VTALWGKVNV
KAHGKKVLGA
KAHGKKVLGA
KAHGKKVLGA
VCVLAHHFGK
VCVLAHHFGK
VCVLAHHFGK
DEVGGEALGR
DEVGGEALGR
DEVGGEALGR
FSDGLAHLDN
FSDGLNHLDN
FSDGLAHLDN
EFTPPVQAAY
EFTPPVQAAY
EFTPPVQAAY
LLVVYPWTQR
LLLVYPWTQR 
LLVVYPWTQR
LKGTFATLSE
LKGTFAQLSE
LKGTFAQLSE
QKVVAGVANA
QKVVAGVANA
QKVVAGVANA
FFESFGDLST
FFESFGDLSS
FFESFGDLST
LHCDKLHVDP
LHCDKLHVDP
LHCDKLHVDP
LAHKYH
LAHKYH
LAHKYH
1
1
1
51
51
51
101
101
101
Data from Human: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AAA21113.1; rhesus monkey: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/protein/122634; gibbon: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/122616
rhesus monkeys, and gibbons. Because a complete sequence 
would not ﬁt on one line here, the sequences are divided into 
three segments: amino acids 1–50, 51–100, and 101–146. The 
sequences for the three different species are aligned so that 
you can compare them easily. For example, you can see that for 
all three species, the ﬁrst amino acid is V (valine) and the 146th 
amino acid is H (histidine).
2. For each nonhuman species, what percent 
of its amino acids are identical to the human 
sequence of b-globin?
3. Based on these data alone, state a 
more closely related to humans. What is your 
reasoning?
4. What other evidence could you use to 
support your hypothesis?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientiﬁc Skills  
Exercise can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Scan the monkey and gibbon sequences, letter by letter, 
circling any amino acids that do not match the human 
sequence. (a) How many amino acids differ between 
(b)
▶ Human ▶  Rhesus 
monkey
▶ Gibbon
Problem-Solving 
Exercises guide students in 
applying scientific skills and 
interpreting real data in the 
context of solving a real-world 
problem. A version of each 
Problem-Solving Exercise can 
also be assigned in Mastering 
Biology.
In this exercise, you will investigate whether amphibians can acquire resistance to the 
fungal pathogen Bd.
Your Approach The principle guiding your investigation is that prior exposure 
to a pathogen can enable amphibians to acquire immunological resistance to that 
pathogen. To see whether this occurs after exposure to Bd, you will analyze data on 
acquired resistance in Cuban tree frogs (Osteopilus septentrionalis).
Your Data To create variation in number of prior exposures to Bd, Cuban tree frogs 
were exposed to Bd and cleared of their infection (using heat treatments) from zero 
to three times; frogs with no prior exposures are referred to as “naive.” Researchers 
then exposed frogs to Bd and measured mean abundance of Bd on the frog’s skin, 
frog survival, and abundance of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell involved in 
the vertebrate immune response).
   Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving  
Exercise can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Can declining amphibian 
populations be saved by  
a vaccine?
Amphibian populations are declining rapidly 
worldwide. The fungus Batrachochytrium 
dendrobatidis (Bd) has contributed to this 
decline: This pathogen causes severe skin 
infections in many amphibian species, leading 
to massive die-offs. Efforts to save amphibians 
from Bd have had limited success, and 
there is little evidence that frogs and other 
amphibians have acquired resistance to
 Bd on 
their own.
Yellow-legged frogs (Rana muscosa) in 
California killed by Bd infection
24,000
12,000
16,000
14,000
18,000
20,000
22,000
0
01 23 4
Bd abundance on frog’s 
skin (organisms/g of frog)
Number of prior 
Bd exposures
80
70
10
30
20
40
50
60
0
01 23 4
Percentage survival
Number of prior 
Bd exposures
Your Analysis
1. Describe and interpret the results shown in the ﬁgure.
2. (a) Graph the data in the table. (b) Based on these data, develop a hypothesis 
that explains the results discussed in question 1.
3. Breeding populations of amphibian species threatened by Bd have been estab-
lished in captivity. In addition, evidence suggests that Cuban tree frogs can  
acquire resistance after exposure to dead Bd. Based on this information and 
your answers to questions 1 and 2, suggest a strategy for repopulating regions 
decimated by Bd.
Number  
of prior  
Bd  
exposures
Thousands of 
lymphocytes 
per g of frog
01 34
12 40
22 44
32 27
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   13 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 15 ===

Innovation in Assessment
Dynamic Study Modules use the latest 
developments in cognitive science to help students study 
by adapting to their performance in real time. Students 
build confidence and understanding, enabling them to 
participate and perform better, both in and out of class. 
Available on smartphones, tablets, and computers.
Incorrect; Try Again
You labeled 2 of 7 targets incorrectly. You have labeled target (a) incorrectly. Notice that this organelle 
has a smooth membrane. It is involved in building macromolecules, but not proteins.
Incorrect; Try Again
You labeled 2 of 7 targets incorrectly. You have labeled target (a) incorrectly. Notice that this organelle 
has a smooth membrane. It is involved in building macromolecules, but not proteins.
Wrong-Answer Feedback Using data gathered 
from all of the students using the program, Mastering 
Biology offers wrong-answer feedback that is 
specific to each student. Rather than simply providing 
feedback of the “right/wrong/try again” variety, 
Mastering Biology guides students toward the correct 
final answer without giving the answer away.
UPDATED! Test Bank questions have been 
analyzed and revised with student success in mind. 
Revisions account for how students read, analyze, and 
engage with the content.
“I wouldn’t have passed my class 
without Mastering Biology. The 
feedback doesn’t just tell me I’m 
wrong, it gave me a paragraph of 
feedback on why I was wrong and 
how I could better understand it.”
—Student, University of Texas at 
Arlington
14 
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   14 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 16 ===

Innovation in Instructor Resources
ACC
TGG
Ready-to-Go
Teaching Modules
Biology: A Global Approach, Twelfth Edition
Ready-to-Go Teaching Modules 
provide instructors with easy-to-use 
teaching tools for the toughest topics 
in General Biology.
Assign ready-made 
activities and
assignments for
before, during,
and after class.
Incorporate active
learning with 
class-tested
resources from 
biology instructors.
Take full advantage of 
Mastering Biology and 
Learning CatalyticsTM, 
the powerful “bring 
your own device”
student assessment 
system.
DURING
CLASS
AFTER
CLASS
BEFORE
CLASS
The Light
Reactions
CONCEPT 11.3
Meiosis
CONCEPT 13.3
Mitosis
CONCEPT 12.2
Oxidative
Phosphorylation
CONCEPT 10.4
Mechanisms of
Evolution
CONCEPT 23.3
NEW!
DNA
Replication
CONCEPT 16.2
The trp and lac 
Operons
CONCEPT 18.1
NEW!
Phylogenetic
Trees
CONCEPT 22.3
Resting and 
Action Potentials
CONCEPT 48.3
Transport in
Plants
CONCEPT 36.2
The Human
Digestive System
CONCEPT 42.3
NEW!
Cardiac Cycle and
Heart Function
CONCEPT 43.2
NEW!
Trophic
Relationships
CONCEPT 55.3
Interpreting Data
on Introduced 
Species
CONCEPT 56.1
NEW!
Gene Expression:
Mutations
CONCEPT 17.5
NEW! 5 new Ready-to-Go Teaching Modules expand the number of modules to 15. These 
instructor resources are designed to make use of teaching tools before, during, and after class, including 
new ideas for in-class activities. The modules incorporate the best that the text, Mastering Biology, 
and Learning Catalytics have to offer and can be accessed through the Instructor Resources area of 
Mastering Biology.
NEW! Early Alerts 
in Mastering Biology 
help instructors know 
when students may 
be struggling in the 
course. This insight 
enables instructors to 
provide personalized 
communication and 
support at the moment 
students need it so 
they can stay—and 
succeed—in the course.
  15
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   15 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 17 ===

16 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
To Jane, our coauthor, mentor, and friend. Enjoy your retirement! LAU, MLC, SAW, and PVM
About the Authors
The author team’s contributions reflect their biological expertise as 
researchers and their teaching sensibilities gained from years of expe-
rience as instructors at diverse institutions. They are also experienced 
textbook authors, having written Campbell Biology in Focus in addition 
to Biology.
Steven A. Wasserman is Professor of Biology at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). He earned an 
A.B. from Harvard University and a Ph.D. from MIT. Working on the fruit fly Drosophila, Steve has done research 
on developmental biology, reproduction, and immunity. Having taught genetics, development, and physiology 
to undergraduate, graduate, and medical students, he now focuses on introductory biology, for which he has been 
honored with UCSD’s Distinguished Teaching Award.
Peter V. Minorsky is Professor of Biology at Mercy College in New Y ork, where he teaches introductory biology, 
ecology, and botany. He received his A.B. from V assar College and his Ph.D. from Cornell University. Peter taught at 
Kenyon College, Union College, Western Connecticut State University, and V assar College; he is also the science writer 
for the journal Plant Physiology. His research interests concern how plants sense environmental change. Peter received 
the 2008 Award for T eaching Excellence at Mercy College.
Rebecca B. Orr (Ready-to-Go T eaching Modules, Interactive Visual Activities, eT ext Media Integration) is Professor of 
Biology at Collin College in Plano, T exas, where she teaches introductory biology. She earned her B.S. from T exas A&M 
University and her Ph.D. from University of T exas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas. Rebecca has a passion for 
investigating strategies that result in more effective learning and retention, and she is a certified T eam-Based Learning 
Collaborative Trainer Consultant. She enjoys focusing on the creation of learning opportunities that both engage and 
challenge students.
Neil A. Campbell (1946–2004) earned his M.A. from the University of California, Los Angeles, and his Ph.D. from 
the University of California, Riverside. His research focused on desert and coastal plants. Neil’s 30 years of teaching 
included introductory biology courses at Cornell University, Pomona College, and San Bernardino V alley College, 
where he received the college’s first Outstanding Professor Award in 1986. For many years he was also a visiting scholar 
at UC Riverside. Neil was the founding author of Biology.
Michael L. Cain is an ecologist and evolutionary biologist who is now writing full-time. Michael earned an A.B. 
from Bowdoin College, an M.Sc. from Brown University, and a Ph.D. from Cornell University. As a faculty member 
at New Mexico State University, he taught introductory biology, ecology, evolution, botany, and conservation 
biology. Michael is the author of dozens of scientific papers on topics that include foraging behavior in insects 
and plants, long-distance seed dispersal, and speciation in crickets. He is also a coauthor of an ecology textbook.
Lisa A. Urry is Professor of Biology at Mills College. After earning a B.A. at Tufts University, she completed her 
Ph.D. at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Lisa has conducted research on gene expression during 
embryonic and larval development in sea urchins. Deeply committed to promoting opportunities in science for 
women and underrepresented minorities, she has taught courses ranging from introductory and developmental 
biology to an immersive course on the U.S./Mexico border.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   16 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 18 ===

 P R E F A C E  17
on their own or for instructors to assign. These resources 
include Get Ready for This Chapter questions, Figure 
W alkthroughs, HHMI BioInteractive videos, Ready-to-Go 
Teac hing Modules, and more.
 /uni25A0NEW! Updated Content. As in each new edition of 
Biology, the Twelfth Edition incorporates new content, 
summarized on pages 19–21. Content updates reflect 
rapid, ongoing changes in knowledge about climate 
change, genomics, gene-editing technology (CRISPR), 
evolutionary biology, microbiome-based therapies, and 
more. In addition, Unit 7 includes a new section on 
“Biological Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation 
in Human Sexuality,” which provides instructors 
and students with a thoughtful, clear, and current 
introduction to topics of tremendous relevance to  
biology, to student lives, and to current public  
discourse and events.
 /uni25A0 5 NEW! Ready-to-Go T eaching Modules. The Ready-
to-Go Teaching Modules provide instructors with active 
learning exercises and questions to use in class, plus 
Mastering Biology assignments that can be assigned before 
and after class. A total of 15 modules are now available in 
the Instructor Resources area of Mastering Biology.
Pearson eText
Students using the Pearson eText will reap all the benefits of 
the new text features, while also benefiting from the follow-
ing new and existing interactive resources:
 /uni25A0NEW! An expanded collection of the popular Figure 
Walkthroughs guide students through key figures  
with narrated explanations and figure mark-ups that 
reinforce important points. 
 /uni25A0NEW! Links to the AAAS Science in the Classroom 
website provide research papers from Science with 
annotations to help students understand the papers. 
These links are included at the end of each appropriate 
chapter.
 /uni25A0EXPANDED! 500 animations and videos bring 
biology to life. These include new resources from HHMI 
BioInteractive that engage students in topics from 
CRISPR to coral reefs.
We are honored to present Biology: A Global 
Approach, which has been adapted from Campbell 
Biology, T welfth Edition, for a global audience. 
For the last three decades, Biology has been the 
leading college text in the biological sciences. 
It has been translated into 19 languages and 
has provided millions of students with a solid 
foundation in college-level biology. This success 
is a testament not only to Neil Campbell’s original vision but 
also to the dedication of hundreds of reviewers (listed on pages 
29–33), who, together with editors, artists, and contributors, 
have shaped and inspired this work.
Our goals for the Twelfth Edition include:
 /uni25A0supporting students with new visual presentations of 
content and new study tools
 /uni25A0supporting instructors by providing new teaching 
modules with tools and materials for introducing, teaching, 
and assessing important and often challenging topics
 /uni25A0integrating text and media to engage, guide, and inform 
students in an active process of inquiry and learning
Our starting point, as always, is our commitment to craft-
ing text and visuals that are accurate, are current, and reflect 
our passion for teaching biology.
New to This Edition
Here we provide an overview of the new features that we have 
developed for the Twelfth Edition; we invite you to explore 
pages 5–15 for more information and examples.
 /uni25A0NEW! Chapter Openers Re-envisioned. Catalyzed by 
feedback from students and instructors, informed by data 
analytics, and building on the results of science education 
research, we have redesigned the opening of every chapter 
of the text. The result is more visual, more interactive, and 
more engaging. In place of an opening narrative, the first 
page of each chapter is organized around three new elements 
that provide students with the specific tools and approaches 
needed to achieve the learning objectives of that chapter:
 /uni25A0NEW! Visual Overview. Centered on a basic biological 
question related to the opening photo and legend, the 
Visual Overview illustrates a core idea of the chapter with 
straightforward art and text. Students get an immediate 
sense of what the chapter is about and what kinds of 
thinking will underlie its exploration.
 /uni25A0NEW! Study Tip. Just as the Visual Overview introduces 
students to what they will learn, the study tip offers 
guidance in how to learn. It encourages students to learn 
actively through such proven strategies as drawing a 
flow chart, labeling a diagram, or making a table. Each 
tip provides an effective strategy for tackling important 
content in the chapter.
 /uni25A0NEW! Highlights of Digital Resources. 
In conversations with users of the textbook, 
we often encounter a limited awareness of 
the digital tools the text provides to facilitate 
instruction and learning. We therefore 
created Go to Mastering Biology, a chapter 
opener section where we highlight some 
of the tutorials, animations, and other 
interactives available for students to explore 
Preface
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   17 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 19 ===

18 PREFACE
they are well-aligned with the core competencies outlined by 
the Vision and Change national conferences, organized by 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
where hundreds of biologists met to discuss the needs of under-
graduate biology. Furthermore, the core concepts defined by 
Vision and Change have close parallels in the unifying themes 
that are introduced in Chapter 1 and integrated throughout 
the book.
Chief among the themes of both Vision and Change and 
Biology is evolution. Each chapter of this text includes at 
least one Evolution section that explicitly focuses on evo-
lutionary aspects of the chapter material, and each chapter 
ends with an Evolution Connection Question and a Write 
About a Theme Question.
To help students distinguish “the forest from the trees,” 
each chapter is organized around a framework of three 
to seven carefully chosen Key Concepts. The text, Con-
cept Check Questions, Summary of Key Concepts, and 
Mastering Biology resources all reinforce these main ideas 
and essential facts.
Because text and illustrations are equally important for 
learning biology, integration of text and figures has 
been a hallmark of Biology since the First Edition. The new 
 Visual Overviews, together with our popular Visualizing 
 Figures, Exploring Figures, and Make Connections Figures, 
epitomize this approach.
To encourage active reading of the text, Biology includes 
numerous opportunities for students to stop and think about 
what they are reading, often by putting pencil to paper to 
draw a sketch, annotate a figure, or graph data. Answering 
these questions requires students to write or draw as well as 
think and thus helps develop the core competency of com-
municating science.
Finally, Biology has always featured scientific inquiry. 
The inquiry activities provide students practice in apply-
ing the process of science and using quantitative reasoning, 
 addressing core competencies from Vision and Change.
Our Partnership with Instructors 
and Students
The real test of any textbook is how well it helps  instructors 
teach and students learn. We welcome comments from 
both students and instructors. Please address your 
suggestions to:
Lisa Urry (Chapter 1 and Units 1–3): lurry@mills.edu
Michael Cain (Units 4, 5, and 8): mlcain@nmsu.edu
Peter Minorsky (Unit 6): pminorsky@mercy.edu
Steven Wasserman (Unit 7): stevenw@ucsd.edu
Rebecca Orr (Media): rorr@collin.edu
 /uni25A0Links to Interviews from all editions of Biology are 
included in the chapter where they are most relevant. The 
interviews show students the human side of science by 
featuring diverse scientists talking about how they became 
interested in biology and what inspires them. 
For more information, see pages 8–10.
Mastering Biology
Mastering Biology provides valuable resources for instructors 
to assign homework and for students to study on their own:
 /uni25A0Assignments. Mastering Biology is the most widely 
used online assessment and tutorial program for biology, 
providing an extensive library of thousands of tutorials 
and questions that are graded automatically.
 /uni25A0NEW! Early Alerts give instructors a quick way to 
monitor students’ progress and provide feedback, even 
before the first test.
 /uni25A0NEW! AAAS Science in the Classroom journal articles 
can be assigned with automatically graded questions.
 /uni25A0Hundreds of self-paced tutorials provide 
individualized coaching with specific hints and 
feedback on the most difficult topics in the course.
 /uni25A0Optional Adaptive Follow-up Assignments provide 
additional questions tailored to each student’s needs.
 /uni25A0Pearson eT ext. The Pearson eText, described above, can 
be directly accessed from Mastering Biology.
 /uni25A0Dynamic Study Modules. These popular review tools 
can be assigned, or students can use them for self-study.
 /uni25A0Study Area. Media references in the printed book direct 
students to the wealth of online self-study resources 
available to them in the Mastering Biology Study Area, 
including Figure Walkthroughs, videos, animations, Get 
Ready for This Chapter, Practice Tests, Cumulative Test, 
and more.
 /uni25A0Instructor Resources. This area of Mastering Biology 
provides one-stop shopping for Ready-to-Go Teaching 
Modules, PowerPoints, Clicker Questions, animations, 
videos, the Test Bank, and more.
For more information, see pages 14–15 and 25–26 and visit 
www.masteringbiology.com.
Our Hallmark Features
T eachers of general biology face a daunting challenge: to help 
students acquire a conceptual framework for organizing an 
ever-expanding amount of information. The hallmark features 
of Biology provide such a framework, while promoting a deeper 
understanding of biology and the process of science. As such, 
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   18 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 20 ===

(a) Effects of maternal diet on genetically 
identical mice.
(b) The Dutch Hunger Winter.
. Figure 18.8 Examples of epigenetic inheritance.
This section highlights selected new content in Biology, 
Twelfth Edition. In addition to the content updates noted 
here, every chapter has a new Visual Overview on the 
chapter opening page.
information on human brown fat usage, the role of fermenta-
tion during the production of chocolate, and recent research 
on the role of lactate in mammalian metabolism. Chapter 11 
begins with a new concept that puts photosynthesis into a big-
picture ecological context. Chapter 11 also includes a discussion 
of the 2018 discovery of a new form of chlorophyll found in 
cyanobacteria that can carry out photosynthesis using far-red 
light. In Chapter 12, the cell cycle figure (Figure 12.6) now in-
cludes cell images and labels describing the events of each phase.
Unit 1 THE ROLE OF CHEMISTRY IN BIOLOGY
In Unit 1, new content engages students in learning 
foundational chemistry. Chapter 2 includes a new micrograph 
of the tiny hairs on a gecko’s foot that allow it to walk up a wall. 
The opening photo for Chapter 3 features a ringed seal, a species 
endangered by the melting of Arctic sea ice due to climate 
change. Chapter 3 also has added coverage on the discovery 
of a large subsurface reservoir of liquid water on Mars and the 
first CO2 enhancement study done on an unconfined natural 
coral reef (both reported in 2018). Chapter 4 now includes 
the discovery of carbon-based compounds on Mars reported 
by NASA in 2018. 
In Chapter 5, the 
technique of cryo-
electron microscopy 
is introduced, due 
to its increasing 
importance in the 
determination of 
molecular structure.
Figure 6.1 includes 
a new photo of 
bioluminescent click 
beetle larvae on the 
outside of a termite 
mound and a new 
Visual Overview 
that illustrates 
how the laws of 
thermodynamics 
apply to metabolic 
reactions like 
bioluminescence.
Unit 2 CELL BIOLOGY
Our main goal for this unit was to make the material more 
accessible, inviting, and exciting to students. Chapter 7 includes 
a new text description of cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) 
and a new cryo-EM image in Figure 7.3. Art has been added to 
Figure 7.17 to illustrate the dynamic nature of mitochondrial 
networks. Chapter 8 begins with a new chapter-opening image 
showing neurotransmitter release during exocytosis. 
In Chapter 9, the relevance of synaptic signaling is un-
derscored by mentioning that it is a target for treatment of 
depression, anxiety, and PTSD. Chapter 10 includes new 
Unit 3 THE GENETIC BASIS OF LIFE
Chapters 13–17 incorporate changes that help students grasp 
the more abstract concepts of genetics and their chromosomal 
and molecular underpinnings. For example, a new Concept 
Check 13.2 question asks students about shoes as an analogy 
for chromosomes. In Chapter 14, the classic idea of a single 
gene determining hair or eye color, or even earlobe attachment, 
is discussed as an oversimplification. Also, the “Fetal T esting” 
section has been updated to reflect current practices in obstetrics. 
Chapter 15  now includes new information on  “three-parent” 
babies. In Concept 16.3, the text and Figure 16.23 have been 
extensively revised to reflect recent models of the structure 
and organization of interphase chromatin, as well as how 
chromosomes condense during preparation for mitosis.  
Chapter 17 now describes the mutation responsible for the 
albino phenotype of the Asinara donkeys featured in the chapter-
opening photo. T o make it easier to cover CRISPR, a new section 
has been added to Concept 1 7 .5 describing the CRISPR-Cas9 
system, including Figure 17.28, “Gene editing using the CRISPR-
Cas9 system” (formerly Figure 19.14).
Chapters 18–20 are extensively updated, driven by exciting 
new discoveries based on DNA sequencing and gene-editing tech-
nology. In Chapter 18, the coverage of epigenetic inheritance has 
been enhanced and updated, including the new Figure 18.8.
Also in Chapter 18, a description of topologically associated 
domains has been added, along with an update on the 4D 
Nucleome Network. Chapter 19 has been extensively updated, 
including addition of two new subsections, “Personal Genome 
Analysis” and “Personalized Medicine,” with new information 
Highlights of New Content
Figure 6.1 The green glowing spots on the outside of this Brazilian termite mound 
are larvae of the click beetle, Pyrophorus nyctophanus. These larvae convert the 
energy stored in organic molecules to light, a process called bioluminescence, which 
attracts termites that the larvae eat. Bioluminescence and other metabolic activities 
in a cell are energy transformations that are subject to physical laws.
6JGƂTUVNCYoH
VJGTOod[nCOiEU
Energy can be 
transferred and 
transformed, but it 
cannot be created 
or destroyed.
For example:
How do the laws of thermodynamics relate to
biological processes?
 Light energy 
from the sun 
Chemical energy in organic 
molecules in plants
Transformed 
by plants to
Transformed 
by termites to
Transformed by 
click beetle larvae to
Chemical energy in organic 
molecules in termites
Light energy produced
by bioluminescence
Heat
Heat
Heat
6JGUGEondNCYoHVJGTOod[nCOiEU 
Every energy transfer or transformation increases 
the entropy (disorder) of the universe. For 
example, during every energy transformation, 
some energy is converted to thermal energy and 
released as heat:
Plant using light 
to make organic 
molecules
Termite digesting 
plant and making 
new molecules
Click beetle larva
digesting termite 
and emitting light
. Figure 6.1 
 HIGHLIGHTS OF NEW CONTENT 19
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   19 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 21 ===

Unit 4 EVOLUTION
(a) (b)
. Figure 23.19 Lack of variation in a population can limit 
adaptation.
Unit 5  T H E  D I V E R S I T Y  O F  L I F E
The revision of Unit 4 uses an evidence-based approach 
to strengthen how we help students understand key 
evolutionary concepts. For example, new text in Concept 24.3 
describes how hybrids can become reproductively isolated 
from both parent species, leading to the formation of a new 
species. Evidence supporting this new material comes from 
a 2018 study on the descendants of hybrids between two 
species of Galápagos finches and provides an example of 
how scientists can observe the formation of a new species in 
nature. In Concept 25.2, the discussion of fossils as a form of 
scientific evidence is supported by a new figure (Figure 25.5) 
that highlights five different types of fossils and how they are 
formed. The unit also features new material that connects 
evolutionary concepts and societal issues. For example, 
in Chapter 23, new text and a new figure (Figure 23.19) 
describe how some snowshoe hare populations have not 
adapted to ongoing climate change, causing them to be 
poorly camouflaged in early winter and leading to increased 
mortality. Additional changes include a new section of 
text in Chapter 21 and a figure (Figure 21.22) describing 
biogeographical evidence for evolution in a group of 
freshwater fishes that cannot survive in salt water, yet live in 
regions separated by wide stretches of ocean. In Chapter 25, 
a new figure (Figure 25.1 1) provides fossil evidence of an 
enormous change in the evolutionary history of life: the first 
appearance of large, multicellular eukaryotes.
Ceftaroline
Daptomycin
Linezolid
Imipenem
Vancomycin
Methicillin
Colistin
Erythromycin
Tetracycline
Penicillin
1930 1950 1970 1990 2010
Year
Antibiotic:Antibiotic discovered
Medical usage begins
Resistance observed
c Figure 27.22  
The rise of 
antibiotic 
resistance.
In Chapter 35, greater emphasis is placed on how structure fits 
function in vascular plants by way of a new Visual Overview. In 
Chapter 36, a new Visual Skills Question provides a quantitative 
exercise in estimating stomatal density. Chapter 37 begins with 
an emphasis on the importance of crop fertilization in feeding 
the world. T o increase student engagement, renewed emphasis 
is placed on the link between the nutrition of plants and the 
Unit 6 PLANTS: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
on direct-to-consumer genome analysis. Other updates include 
the first cloning of a primate, stem cell treatment of age-related 
macular degeneration, CRISPR correction of the sickle-cell 
disease allele in mice, and a report of gene editing of fertilized 
human eggs that resulted in live births. Chapter 20 updates 
include results of the Cancer Genome Atlas Project, a newly 
discovered function of retrotransposon transcription, and new 
information on the FOXP2 gene.
In keeping with our goal of developing students’ skills in 
interpreting visual representations in biology, we have 
added a new Visualizing Figure, Figure 32.8, “Visualizing 
Animal Body Symmetry and Axes.” New Visual Skills 
Questions provide practice on topics such as interpreting 
phylogenetic trees and using graphs to infer how rapidly 
antibiotic resistance evolves in bacteria. In Chapter 26, 
the topic of emerging viral diseases has been updated 
extensively and reorganized to clearly differentiate influenza 
viruses that are emerging from those that cause seasonal 
flu. Other Chapter 26 updates include information on 
vaccine programs, mentioning a large measles outbreak in 
2019 that correlated with lower vaccination rates in that 
region. Information has also been added on improvement of 
treatment regimes for HIV . Chapter 31 has been significantly 
revised to account for new fossil discoveries and updates to 
the phylogenetic tree of fungi (Figure 31.10). Chapter 34 has 
been updated with recent genomic data and fossil discoveries 
indicating that Neanderthals and Denisovans are more 
closely related to each other than to humans and that they 
interbred with each other (and with humans), including two 
new figures (Figures 34.51 and 34.52b). In Chapter 29, a new 
figure (Figure 29.1) provides a visual overview of major steps 
in the colonization of land by plants, and revisions to text in 
Concept 29.1 strengthen our description of derived traits of 
plants that facilitated life on land. Chapter 27 includes a new 
section of text that describes the rise of antibiotic resistance 
and multidrug resistance and discusses novel approaches 
in the search for new antibiotics. This new material is 
supported by two new figures, Figure 27.22 and Figure 27.23. 
Other updates include the revision of many phylogenies 
to reflect recent phylogenomic data; a new Inquiry Figure 
(Figure 28.26) on the root of the eukaryotic tree; and new 
text describing the 2017 discovery of 315,000-year-old fossils 
of a hominin that had facial features like those of humans, 
while the back of its skull was elongated, as in earlier species.
20 HIGHLIGHTS OF NEW CONTENT
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   20 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 22 ===

The Unit 7 revisions feature pedagogical innovations coupled 
with updates for currency. A striking new underwater image 
of Emperor penguins (Figure 40.1) opens the unit and 
highlights the contributions of form, function, and behavior 
to homeostasis in general as well as to the specific topic of 
thermoregulation. The artwork used to introduce and explore 
homeostasis throughout the unit (Figures 40.8, 40.17 , 41.18, 
42.23, 43.28, 44.19, and 44.21) has been improved and 
refined to provide a clear and consistent presentation of the 
role of perturbation in triggering a response. In Chapter 47, 
the introduction of the adaptive  immune response has been 
shifted to later in the chapter, allowing students to build on 
the features of innate immunity before tackling the more 
demanding topic of the adaptive response. In  Chapter 45,  a 
new section of text in Concept 45.4 provides a clear and current 
introduction to “Biological Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual 
Orientation in Human Sexuality.” In Chapter 48, the structural 
overview of neurons is now completed before the introduction 
of information processing. A new illustration,  Figure 49.8, 
provides a concise visual comparison of sympathetic and 
parasympathetic neurons with each other and with motor 
neurons of the CNS. In addition, in-depth consideration of 
glia is now provided in Concept 49.1, where it is more logically 
integrated into the overview of nervous systems.  Among the 
content updates that enhance currency and student engagement 
c Figure 49.8  
Comparison 
of pathways 
in the motor 
and autonomic 
nervous systems.
 (b) Autonomic nervous system
(a) Motor system
Single
neuron
Preganglionic
neurons
Sympathetic
division
Parasympathetic
division
Postganglionic
neuronsGanglia
Acetylcholine NorepinephrineKey to neurotransmitters
Target: skeletal
muscle cell
Target:
smooth
muscle,
cardiac
muscle,
or gland
throughout the unit are discussions of phage therapy and fecal 
transplantation, state-of-the-art treatments that both rely on 
microbiome data, and chronic traumatic encephalopathy 
(CTE), as well as the latest findings on dinosaur locomotion 
(Concept 40.1), the awarding of a Nobel Prize in 201 7 in the 
field of circadian rhythms (Concept 40.2), and reference to the 
ongoing public health crisis of opioid addiction in the context of 
considering the brain’s reward system (Concept 49.5).
Unit 7 ANIMALS: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
nutrition of the organisms, including humans, that feed on 
them. Table 37.1 concerning plant essential elements has been 
expanded to include micronutrients as well as macronutrients. 
In Concept 37 .2, a new subsection titled “Global Climate 
Change and Food Quality” discusses new evidence that global 
climate change may be negatively impacting the nutritional 
mineral content of crops. In Chapter 38, the discussion of 
genetic engineering and agriculture has been enhanced by 
a discussion of biofortification and by updates concerning 
“Golden Rice.” Chapter 39 includes new updates on the location 
of the IAA receptor in plant cells and the role of abscisic acid 
in bud dormancy. The introduction to Concept 39.2 has been 
revised to emphasize that plants use many classes of chemicals in 
addition to the classic hormones to communicate information.
(a) Nutrients drain from agricultural land (green) and cities 
(red) through the vast Mississippi watershed to the 
Gulf of Mexico.
(b) The 2017 dead zone, represented here, was the 
largest yet measured. It occupied 22,730 km2
(8,776 mi2), an area slightly larger than New Jersey.
Mississippi
LouisianaTexas
50 km
< 2.0 mg/L dissolved O2 
. Figure 56.23 A dead zone arising from nitrogen pollution 
in the Mississippi basin.
 HIGHLIGHTS OF NEW CONTENT 21
Complementary goals of the Unit 8 revision were to 
strengthen our coverage of core concepts while also increasing 
our coverage of how human actions affect ecological 
communities. Revisions include a new section of text and a 
new figure (Figure 51.7) on how plants (and deforestation) 
can affect the local or regional climate; a new section of 
text in Concept 55.1 that summarizes how ecosystems 
work; new text and a new figure (Figure 51.25) illustrating 
how rapid evolution can cause rapid ecological change; 
new material in Concept 55.2 on eutrophication and how 
it can cause the formation of large “dead zones” in aquatic 
ecosystems; and new text and a new figure (Figure 54.22) on 
how the abundance of organisms at each trophic level can be 
controlled by bottom-up or top-down control. A new figure 
(Figure 56.23) shows the extent of the record-breaking 2017 
dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico and the watershed that 
contributes to its nutrient load. In addition, Concept 56.1  
includes a new section that describes attempts to use cloning 
to resurrect species lost to extinction, while Concept 56.4  
includes a new section of text and two new figures (Figure 56.27  
and 56.28) on plastic waste, a major and growing 
environmental problem. In keeping with our book-wide goal 
of expanding our coverage of climate change, Chapter 56 has 
a new Scientific Skills Exercise in which students interpret 
changes in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Chapter 55 
describes how climate warming is causing large regions 
of tundra in Alaska to release more CO2 than they absorb 
(thereby contributing to further climate warming); a new 
figure (Figure 56.32) describes human and natural factors that 
contribute to rising global temperatures; and a new section 
of text in Concept 56.4 describes how global climate change 
models are developed and why they are valuable.
Unit 8 THE ECOLOGY OF LIFE
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   21 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 23 ===

22 SKILLS EXERCISES
 3 3  Understanding Experimental Design and 
Interpreting Data 754
 3 4  Determining the Equation of a Regression Line 805
 3 5  Using Bar Graphs to Interpret Data 816
 3 6  Calculating and Interpreting Temperature 
Coefficients 844
 3 7  Making Observations 866
 3 8  Using Positive and Negative Correlations to 
Interpret Data 888
 3 9  Interpreting Experimental Results from a Bar 
Graph 918
 4 0  Interpreting Pie Charts 946
 4 1  Designing a Controlled Experiment 968
 4 2  Interpreting Data from an Experiment with 
Genetic Mutants 994
 4 3  Making and Interpreting Histograms 1014
 4 4  Describing and Interpreting Quantitative Data 1033
 4 5  Making Inferences and Designing an 
Experiment 1062
 4 6  Interpreting a Change in Slope 1081
 4 7  Comparing Two Variables on a Common  
x-Axis 1120
 4 8  Interpreting Data Values Expressed in Scientific 
Notation 1140
 4 9  Designing an Experiment Using Genetic 
Mutants 1153
 5 0  Interpreting a Graph with Log Scales 1194
 5 1  Making a Bar Graph and a Line Graph to Interpret 
Data 1220
 5 2  Testing a Hypothesis with a Quantitative 
Model 1236
 5 3  Using the Logistic Equation to Model Population 
Growth 1258
 5 4  Making a Bar Graph and a Scatter Plot 1275
 5 5  Interpreting Quantitative Data 1305
 5 6  Graphing Data and Evaluating Evidence 1337
Problem-Solving Exercises
 5  Are you a victim of fish fraud? 137
 9  Can a skin wound turn deadly? 216
 1 7  Are insulin mutations the cause of three infants’ 
neonatal diabetes? 409
 2 4  Is hybridization promoting insecticide resistance in 
mosquitoes that transmit malaria? 574
 3 4  Can declining amphibian populations be saved by 
a vaccine? 787
 3 9  How will climate change affect crop 
productivity? 917
 4 1  Is thyroid regulation normal in this patient? 964
 5 5  Can an insect outbreak threaten a forest’s ability 
to absorb CO2 from the atmosphere? 1303
Scientific Skills Exercises
 1  Interpreting a Pair of Bar Graphs 71
 2  Calibrating a Standard Radioactive Isotope Decay 
Curve and Interpreting Data 81
 3  Interpreting a Scatter Plot with a Regression Line 102
 4  Working with Moles and Molar Ratios 106
 5  Analyzing Polypeptide Sequence Data 137
 6  Making a Line Graph and Calculating a Slope 155
 7  Using a Scale Bar to Calculate Volume and Surface 
Area of a Cell 169
 8  Interpreting a Scatter Plot with Two Sets of Data 206
 9  Using Experiments to Test a Model* 
 1 0  Making a Bar Graph and Evaluating a Hypothesis 251
 1 1  Making Scatter Plots with Regression Lines 277
 1 2  Interpreting Histograms 300
 1 3  Making a Line Graph and Converting Between 
Units of Data 314
 1 4  Making a Histogram and Analyzing a Distribution 
Pattern 333
 1 5  Using the Chi-Square (x2
) Test 354
 1 6  Working with Data in a Table 368
 1 7  Interpreting a Sequence Logo 401
 1 8  Analyzing DNA Deletion Experiments 426
 1 9  Analyzing Quantitative and Spatial Gene 
Expression Data* 
 2 0  Reading an Amino Acid Sequence Identity Table 492
 2 1  Making and Testing Predictions 517
 2 2  Using Protein Sequence Data to Test an 
Evolutionary Hypothesis 538
 2 3  Using the Hardy-Weinberg Equation to Interpret 
Data and Make Predictions 549
 2 4  Identifying Independent and Dependent Variables, 
Making a Scatter Plot, and Interpreting Data 569
 2 5  Estimating Quantitative Data from a Graph and 
Developing Hypotheses 594
 2 6  Analyzing a Sequence-Based Phylogenetic Tree to 
Understand Viral Evolution 623
 2 7  Calculating and Interpreting Means and Standard 
Errors 644
  Making a Bar Graph and Interpreting the Data*
 2 8  Interpreting Comparisons of Genetic 
Sequences 649
 2 9  Making Bar Graphs and Interpreting Data 682
 3 0  Using Natural Logarithms to Interpret Data 693
 3 1  Interpreting Genomic Data and Generating 
Hypotheses 711
  Synthesizing Information from Multiple Data Sets*
 3 2  Calculating and Interpreting Correlation 
Coefficients 732
Skills Exercises
*Available only in Mastering Biology.  All other Scientific Skills Exercises are in the 
print book, eText, and Mastering Biology.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   22 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 24 ===

 FEATURED FIGURES 23
 8.21 Endocytosis in Animal Cells 210
 9.8 Cell-Surface Transmembrane Receptors 220
 12.7 Mitosis in an Animal Cell 288
 13.8 Meiosis in an Animal Cell 310
 16.23 Chromatin Packing in a Eukaryotic 
Chromosome 380
 24.3 Reproductive Barriers 564
 25.7 The Origin of Mammals 587
 27.17 Bacterial Diversity 638
 28.5 Protistan Diversity 652
 29.5 Alternation of Generations 674
 29.13 Bryophyte Diversity 680
 29.19 Seedless Vascular Plant Diversity 686
 30.7 Gymnosperm Diversity 696
 30.17 Angiosperm Diversity 704
 33.42 Insect Diversity 766
 34.42 Mammalian Diversity 799
 35.10 Examples of Differentiated Plant Cells 818
 42.5 Four Main Feeding Mechanisms of Animals 979
 44.12 The Mammalian Excretory System 1038
 45.11 Human Gametogenesis 1060
 49.11 The Organization of the Human Brain 1150
 50.10 The Structure of the Human Ear 1171
 50.17 The Structure of the Human Eye 1176
 53.17 Mechanisms of Density-Dependent 
Regulation 1262
 55.14 Water and Nutrient Cycling 1308
 55.17 Restoration Ecology Worldwide 1312
Inquiry Figures
 1.25 Does camouflage affect predation rates on two 
populations of mice? 69
 4.2 Can organic molecules form under conditions 
estimated to simulate those on the early  
Earth? 105
 8.4 Do membrane proteins move? 198
 †11.9 Which wavelengths of light are most effective in 
driving photosynthesis? 266
 12.9 At which end do kinetochore microtubules 
shorten during anaphase? 291
 12.14 Do molecular signals in the cytoplasm regulate the 
cell cycle? 295
 14.3 When F1 hybrid pea plants self- or cross-pollinate, 
which traits appear in the F2 generation? 321
 14.8 Do the alleles for one character segregate into 
gametes dependently or independently of the 
alleles for a different character? 326
 †15.3 In a cross between a wild-type female fruit fly and 
a mutant white-eyed male, what color eyes will 
the F1 and F2 offspring have? 346
Visualizing Figures
 5.16 Visualizing Proteins 127
 7.32 Visualizing the Scale of the Molecular Machinery 
in a Cell 192
 16.7 Visualizing DNA 369
 22.5 Visualizing Phylogenetic Relationships 524
 25.8 Visualizing the Scale of Geologic Time 588
 32.8 Visualizing Animal Body Symmetry and Axes 734
 35.11 Visualizing Primary and Secondary Growth 821
 46.8 Visualizing Gastrulation 1082
 55.13 Visualizing Biogeochemical Cycles 1307
Featured Figures
Make Connections Figures
 5.26 Contributions of Genomics and Proteomics to 
Biology 136
 11.22 The Working Cell 280
 18.27 Genomics, Cell Signaling, and Cancer 442
 23.18 The Sickle-Cell Allele 558
 33.8 Maximizing Surface Area 749
 37.9 Mutualism Across Kingdoms and  
Domains 867
 39.27 Levels of Plant Defenses Against Herbivores 922
 40.23 Life Challenges and Solutions in Plants and 
Animals 948
 44.17 Ion Movement and Gradients 1045
 55.19 The Working Ecosystem 1314
 56.31 Climate Change Has Effects at All Levels of 
Biological Organization 1338
Exploring Figures
 1.3 Levels of Biological Organization 52
 5.18 Levels of Protein Structure 128
 7.3 Microscopy 165
 7.8 Eukaryotic Cells 170
 7.30 Cell Junctions in Animal Tissues 190
Structural Models
Proteins can be represented in different ways, depending on the goal of the illustration.
Using data from structural studies
of proteins, computers can
generate various types of models.
Each model emphasizes a different
aspect of the protein’s structure,
but no model can show what a
protein actually looks like. These
three models depict lysozyme, a
protein in tears and saliva that
helps prevent infection by binding
to target molecules on bacteria.
Simpliﬁed Diagrams
It isn‘t always necessary to
use a detailed computer
model; simpliﬁed
diagrams are useful when
the focus of the ﬁgure is
on the function of the
protein, not the structure.
Space-ﬁlling model: Emphasizes 
the overall globular shape. Shows 
all the atoms of the protein 
(except hydrogen), which are 
color-coded: gray = carbon, 
red = oxygen, blue = nitrogen, 
and yellow = sulfur.
A transparent shape
is drawn around the
contours of a ribbon
model of the protein
rhodopsin, showing
the shape of the
molecule as well as
some internal details.
When structural
details are not
needed, a solid
shape can be used.
A simple shape is used here to
represent a generic enzyme
because the diagram focuses on
enzyme action in general.
Sometimes a protein
is represented simply
as a dot, as shown
here for insulin.
Ribbon model: Shows only 
the polypeptide backbone, 
emphasizing how it folds 
and coils to form a 3-D 
shape, in this case stabilized 
by disulﬁde bridges (yellow lines).
Wireframe model (blue): 
Shows the polypeptide backbone 
with side chains extending from 
it. A ribbon model (purple) is 
superimposed on the wireframe 
model. The bacterial target 
molecule (yellow) is bound.
Pancreas cell
secreting
insulin
Target molecule
Enzyme
1.In which model is it easiest to follow 
the polypeptide backbone? 
2.Draw a simple version of lysozyme that shows its 
overall shape, based on the molecular models in 
the top section of the ﬁgure. 
3.Why is it unnecessary 
to show the actual 
shape of insulin here? 
. Figure 5.16 VISUALIZING PROTEINS
 Instructors: The tutorial “Molecular 
Model: Lysozyme,” in which students 
rotate 3-D models of lysozyme, can 
be assigned in Mastering Biology.
 Instructors: Additional 
questions related to this 
Visualizing Figure can be 
assigned in Mastering 
Biology.
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   23 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 25 ===

 15.9 How does linkage between two genes affect 
inheritance of characters? 351
 16.2 Can a genetic trait be transferred between 
different bacterial strains? 365
 16.4 Is protein or DNA the genetic material of phage 
T2? 366
 †16.12 Does DNA replication follow the conservative, 
semiconservative, or dispersive model? 372
 17.3 Do individual genes specify the enzymes that 
function in a biochemical pathway? 388
 18.22 Could Bicoid be a morphogen that determines the 
anterior end of a fruit fly? 437
 19.16 Can the nucleus from a differentiated animal cell 
direct development of an organism? 463
 19.21 Can a fully differentiated human cell be 
“deprogrammed” to become a stem cell? 466
 20.18 What is the function of a gene (FOXP2) that may 
be involved in language acquisition? 496
 21.13 Can a change in a population’s food source result 
in evolution by natural selection? 511
 22.6 What is the species identity of food being sold as 
whale meat? 525
 23.16 Do females select mates based on traits indicative 
of “good genes”? 556
 24.7 Can divergence of allopatric populations lead to 
reproductive isolation? 568
 24.12 Does sexual selection in cichlids result in 
reproductive isolation? 571
 24.19 How does hybridization lead to speciation in 
sunflowers? 577
 25.27 What causes the loss of spines in lake stickleback 
fish? 602
 26.2 What causes tobacco mosaic disease? 611
 28.26 What is the root of the eukaryotic tree? 666
 29.14 Can bryophytes help prevent landslides on tropical 
mountains? 681
 31.22 Do fungal endophytes benefit a woody plant? 721
 33.29 Did the arthropod body plan result from new Hox 
genes? 760
 36.18 Does phloem sap contain more sugar near sources 
than near sinks? 855
 37.10 How variable are the compositions of bacterial 
communities inside and outside of roots? 868
 39.5 What part of a grass coleoptile senses light, and 
how is the signal transmitted? 901
 39.6 What causes polar movement of auxin from shoot 
tip to base? 902
 39.16 How does the order of red and far-red illumination 
affect seed germination? 911
 40.16 How does a Burmese python generate heat while 
incubating eggs? 942
 40.22 What happens to the circadian clock during 
hibernation? 947
 42.4 Can diet influence the frequency of neural tube 
defects? 978
 43.25 What causes respiratory distress syndrome? 1020
 44.20 Can aquaporin mutations cause diabetes? 1047
 45.8 Why is sperm usage biased when female fruit flies 
mate twice? 1056
 †46.3 Does the distribution of Ca2+ in an egg correlate 
with formation of the fertilization envelope? 1077
 46.23 How does distribution of the gray crescent affect 
the developmental potential of the first two 
daughter cells? 1093
 46.24 Can the dorsal lip of the blastopore induce cells in 
another part of the amphibian embryo to change 
their developmental fate? 1094
 46.26 What role does the zone of polarizing activity 
(ZPA) play in limb pattern formation in 
vertebrates? 1095
 52.8 Does a digger wasp use landmarks to find her 
nest? 1231
 52.24 Are differences in migratory orientation within a 
species genetically determined? 1243
 53.13 How does caring for offspring affect parental 
survival in kestrels? 1259
 †54.3 Can a species’ niche be influenced by 
competition? 1274
 54.20 Is Pisaster ochraceus a keystone species? 1284
 55.6 Which nutrient limits phytoplankton production 
along the coast of Long Island? 1301
 55.12 How does temperature affect litter decomposition 
in an ecosystem? 1306
 56.12 What caused the drastic decline of the Illinois 
greater prairie chicken population? 1325
Research Method Figures
 5.21 X-Ray Crystallography 131
 7.4 Cell Fractionation 166
 11.8 Determining an Absorption Spectrum 265
 13.3 Preparing a Karyotype 306
 14.2 Crossing Pea Plants 320
 14.7 The Testcross 325
 15.11 Constructing a Linkage Map 355
 19.3 Sequencing by Synthesis: Next-Generation 
Sequencing 451
 19.7 The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) 455
 19.11 RT-PCR Analysis of the Expression of Single 
Genes 459
 22.15 Applying Parsimony to a Problem in Molecular 
Systematics 531
 35.21 Using Dendrochronology to Study Climate 827
 37.7 Hydroponic Culture 864
 48.9 Intracellular Recording 1130
 53.2 Determining Population Size Using the Mark-
Recapture Method 1249
 54.14 Determining Microbial Diversity Using Molecular 
Tools 1281
†A related Experimental Inquiry Tutorial can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
24 FEATURED FIGURES
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   24 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 26 ===

 STUDENT AND LAB SUPPLEMENTS 25
Spanish Glossary for Biology
By Laura P. Zanello, University of California, Riverside 978-0-32183498-
0/0-321-83498-4
Into the Jungle: Great Adventures in the Search for Evolution
by Sean B. Carroll, University of Wisconsin, Madison
978-0-32155671-4/0-321-55671-2
Get Ready for Biology
by Lori K. Garrett, Parkland College
978-0-32150057-1/0-321-50057-1
For Students
Student and Lab Supplements
For Lab
Investigating Biology Laboratory Manual,  
Eighth Edition
by Judith Giles Morgan, Emory University, and M. Eloise Brown Carter, 
Oxford College of Emory University
978-1-292-06130-6/1-292-06130-8
With its distinctive investigative approach to learning, this best-selling 
laboratory manual is now more engaging than ever, with full-color 
art and photos throughout. The lab manual encourages students to 
participate in the process of science and develop creative and critical-
reasoning skills.
Preparation Guide for Investigating Biology
This guide contains materials lists, suggested vendors, instructions for 
preparing solutions and constructing materials, schedules for planning 
advance preparation, and more. It is available for downloading through 
the Instructor Resources area of Mastering Biology.
NEW! Mastering Biology LabBench
The LabBench pre-labs feature 13 online tutorials in Mastering Biology 
that will both prepare students for their lab work and reinforce key 
biological principles.
A Short Guide to Writing About Biology, Ninth Edition
by Jan A. Pechenik, Tufts University
978-1-292-12083-6/1-292-12083-5
An Introduction to Chemistry for Biology Students, 
Ninth Edition
by George I. Sackheim, University of Illinois, Chicago
978-0-805-39571-6/0-805-39571-7
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   25 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 27 ===

26 INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES
Instructor Resources
The Instructor Resources Area of Mastering Biology
• 5 NEW! Ready-to-Go Teaching Modules help instructors 
efficiently make use of the available teaching tools for the 
toughest topics. Before-class assignments, in-class activities, 
and after-class assignments are provided for ease of use. 
Instructors can incorporate active learning into their course with 
the suggested activity ideas and clicker questions or Learning 
Catalytics Questions. A total of 15 modules are now available.
• Lecture Presentations in PowerPoint® for each chapter with 
lecture notes, editable figures (art and photos with enlarged, 
customizable labels), tables, and links to animations and videos:
• Accessible Lecture Presentations in PowerPoint with alt text 
for every image; students can access alt text with a screen reader if 
needed
• Editable Images in PowerPoint (all art and photos from the 
text) and all tables from the text in PowerPoint with enlarged, 
customizable labels
• Labeled and Unlabeled JPEG Images, including art, photos 
from the text, and extra photos
• EXPANDED! 500 Instructor Animations and Videos, including 
BioFlix 3-D Animations, HHMI BioInteractive Animations and 
Videos, and much more
• Test Bank questions in TestGen® software and Microsoft® Word. 
This extensively revised resource contains over 4,500 questions, 
including scenario-based questions and art, graph, and data 
interpretation questions. NEW! Every image in the Test Bank has alt 
text, which students can access with a screen reader if needed.
• NEW! Statistics Worksheets for Biology
• Instructor Answers to Scientific Skills Exercises, Problem-Solving 
Exercises, Interpret the Data Questions, and Essay Questions; 
includes rubric and tips for grading short-answer essays
• Instructor Guides for Supplements: Investigating Biology Lab 
Prep Guide and Investigating Biology Lab Data Tables
Learning Catalytics™
Learning Catalytics allows students to use their smartphone, tablet, 
or laptop to respond to questions in class. For more information, visit 
learningcatalytics.com.
Learning Management Systems
Integration with various learning management systems is available 
for Mastering Biology. Contact your sales representative for  
details.
• Clicker Questions in PowerPoint, which can be used to stimulate 
effective classroom discussions (for use with or without clickers):
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   26 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 28 ===

 INTERVIEWS 27
Interviews
Unit 1  THE ROLE OF CHEMISTRY  
IN BIOLOGY 75
Kenneth Olden
National Center for 
Environmental Assessment
Unit 2 CELL BIOLOGY 162
Diana Bautista
University of California, 
Berkeley
Unit 6  PLANTS: STRUCTURE  
AND FUNCTION 811
Dennis Gonsalves
Agricultural Research 
Center, Hilo, Hawaii
Unit 7  ANIMALS: STRUCTURE   
AND FUNCTION 926
Steffanie Strathdee
University of California,  
San Diego
Unit 3 T H E  G E N E T I C  B A S I S  O F  L I F E  303
Francisco Mojica
University of Alicante, 
Spain
Unit 4 EVOLUTION 501
Cassandra Extavour
Harvard University
Unit 5  T H E  D I V E R S I T Y  O F  L I F E  609
Penny Chisholm
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
Unit 8 THE ECOLOGY OF LIFE 1197
Chelsea Rochman
University of Toronto
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   27 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 29 ===

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to express their gratitude to the global community 
of instructors, researchers, students, and publishing professionals 
who have contributed to the Twelfth Edition of Campbell Biology.
As authors of this text, we are mindful of the daunting challenge 
of keeping up to date in all areas of our rapidly expanding subject. 
We are grateful to the many scientists who helped shape this text by 
discussing their research fields with us, answering specific questions 
in their areas of expertise, and sharing their ideas about biology 
education. We are especially grateful to the following, listed alpha-
betically: Graham Alexander, Elizabeth Atkinson, Kristian Axelsen, 
Ron Bassar, Christopher Benz, David Booth, George Brooks, Abby 
Dernberg, Jean DeSaix, Alex Engel, Rachel Kramer Green, Fred 
Holtzclaw, Theresa Holtzclaw, Tim James, Kathy Jones, Azarias 
Karamanlidis, Gary Karpen, Joe Montoya, Laurie Nemzer, Kevin 
Peterson, T. K. Reddy, David Reznick, Thomas Schneider, Alastair 
Simpson, Martin Smith, Steven Swoap, and John Taylor. In addition, 
the biologists listed on pages 29–32 provided detailed reviews, help-
ing us ensure the text’s scientific accuracy and improve its pedagogi-
cal effectiveness. Thanks also to Mary Camuso and Ann Sinclair for 
contributing a creative Study Tip for their fellow students.
Thanks also to the other professors and students, from all over 
the world, who contacted the authors directly with useful sugges-
tions. We alone bear the responsibility for any errors that remain, 
but the dedication of our consultants, reviewers, and other corre-
spondents makes us confident in the accuracy and effectiveness of 
this text.
Interviews with prominent scientists have been a hallmark of 
Campbell Biology since its inception, and conducting these inter-
views was again one of the great pleasures of revising the book. 
To open the eight units of this edition, we are proud to include 
interviews with Kenneth Olden, Diana Bautista, Francisco Mojica, 
Cassandra Extavour, Penny Chisholm, Dennis Gonsalves, Steffanie 
Strathdee, and Chelsea Rochman.
Mastering Biology and the other electronic accompaniments for 
this text are invaluable teaching and learning aids. We are grateful 
to the contributors for the Ready-to-Go Teaching Modules: Chad 
Brassil, Ruth Buskirk, Eileen Gregory, Angela Hodgson, Molly Ja-
cobs, Bridgette Kirkpatrick, Maureen Leupold, Jennifer Metzler, 
Karen Resendes, Justin Shaffer, Allison Silveus, Jered Studinski, 
Cynthia Surmacz, Sara Tallarovic, and Carole Twichell. We would 
also like to extend our sincere appreciation to Carolyn Wetzel for 
her hard work on the Figure Walkthroughs. And our gratitude goes 
to Bryan Jennings and Roberta Batorsky for their work on the Read-
ing Questions. Thanks also to Ann Brokaw and Bob Cooper for their 
contributions to the AAAS Science in the Classroom activities; we 
also appreciate the support of Beth Reudi, Shelby Lake, and Lydia 
Kaprelian from AAAS.
The value of Campbell Biology as a learning tool is greatly en-
hanced by the supplementary materials that have been created for 
instructors and students. We recognize that the dedicated authors 
of these materials are essentially writing mini (and not so mini) 
books. We appreciate the hard work and creativity of all the authors 
listed, with their creations, on pages 25–26. We are also grateful to 
Kathleen Fitzpatrick and Nicole Tunbridge (PowerPoint® Lecture 
Presentations); Roberta Batorsky, Douglas Darnowski, James Lange-
land, and David Knochel (Clicker Questions); Sonish Azam, Ford 
Lux, Karen Bernd, Janet Lanza, Chris Romero, Marshall Sundberg, 
Justin Shaffer, Ed Zalisko, and David Knochel (Test Bank).
Campbell Biology results from an unusually strong synergy be-
tween a team of scientists and a team of publishing professionals.
Our editorial team at Pearson Education again demonstrated un-
matched talents, commitment, and pedagogical insights. Josh Frost, 
our Manager of Higher Ed Global Content Strategy for Life Sciences, 
brought publishing savvy, intelligence, and a much-appreciated 
level head to leading the whole team. The clarity and effectiveness 
of every page owe much to our extraordinary Supervising Editors 
Beth Winickoff and Pat Burner, who worked with a top-notch team 
of Senior Developmental Editors in John Burner, Mary Ann Mur-
ray, Hilair Chism, Andrew Recher, and Mary Hill. Our unsurpassed 
Director of Content Development Ginnie Simione Jutson and 
Courseware Portfolio Management Director Beth Wilbur were indis-
pensable in moving the project in the right direction. We also want 
to thank Robin Heyden for organizing the annual Biology Leader-
ship Conferences and keeping us in touch with the world of AP Biol-
ogy. We also extend our thanks to Ashley Fallon, Editorial Assistant, 
Chelsea Noack, Associate Content Analyst, and Rebecca Berardy 
Schwartz, Product Manager.
You would not have this beautiful text if not for the work of 
the production team: Director, Content Production & Digital 
Studio Erin Gregg; Managing Producer Michael Early; Senior Con-
tent Producer Lori Newman; Photo Researcher Maureen Spuhler; 
Copy Editor Joanna Dinsmore; Proofreader Pete Shanks; Rights 
& Permissions Manager Ben Ferrini; Rights & Permissions Project 
Manager Matt Perry; Senior Project Manager Margaret McConnell 
and the rest of the staff at Integra Software Services, Inc.; Art Pro-
duction Manager Rebecca Marshall, Artist Kitty Auble, and the rest 
of the staff at Lachina Creative; Design Manager Mark Ong; Text 
and Cover Designer Jeff Puda; and Manufacturing Buyer Stacey 
Weinberger. We also thank those who worked on the text’s supple-
ments: Project Manager Shiny Rajesh and her team at Integra 
Software Services.
For creating the wonderful package of electronic media that ac-
companies the text, we are grateful to Senior Content Developer 
Sarah Jensen; Content Producers Kaitlin Smith and Ashley Gordon; 
Director, Production & Digital Studio Katie Foley; Director, Produc-
tion & Digital Studio Laura Tommasi; Supervising Media Producer 
Tod Regan; Specialist, Instructional Design and Development Sarah 
Y oung-Dualan; Digital Program Manager, Science, Caroline Ayres; 
Project Manager Katie Cook; Media Producer Ziki Dekel; Manager, 
Creative Technology Greg Davis; and Senior Learning Tools Strate-
gist Kassi Foley.
For their important roles in marketing the text and media, we 
thank Alysun Estes, Kelly Galli, Jane Campbell, Brad Parkins, and 
Stacey Abraham. For their enthusiasm, encouragement, and sup-
port, we are grateful to Jeanne Zalesky, Director, Global Higher Ed 
Content Management and Strategy, Science & Health Sciences; 
Michael Gillespie, Director, Higher Ed Product Management, Life 
Sciences; Adam Jaworski, VP Product Management Higher Ed, 
Science; and Paul Corey, SVP Global Content Strategy, Higher Ed.
The Pearson sales team, which represents Campbell Biology 
on campus, is an essential link to the users of the text. They tell 
us what you like and don’t like about the text, communicate the 
features of the text, and provide prompt service. We thank them 
for their hard work and professionalism. For representing our text 
to our international audience, we thank our sales and marketing 
partners throughout the world. They are all strong allies in biology 
education.
Finally, we wish to thank our families and friends for their en-
couragement and patience throughout this long project. Our special 
thanks to Lily and Alex (L.A.U.); Debra and Hannah (M.L.C.); Aaron, 
Sophie, Noah, and Gabriele (S.A. W .); Natalie (P . V .M.); and Jim, Abby, 
Dan, and Emily (R.B.O). Thanks to Jane Reece, now retired, for her 
generosity and thoughtfulness throughout her many years as a 
Campbell author. And, as always, thanks to Rochelle, Allison, Jason, 
McKay, and Gus.
Lisa A. Urry, Michael L. Cain, Steven A. Wasserman,  
Peter V . Minorsky, and Rebecca B. Orr
28 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   28 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 30 ===

 R E V I E W E R S  29
Reviewers of Previous EditionsSteve Abedon, Ohio State University; Kenneth Able, State University of New Y ork, Albany; 
Thomas Adams, Michigan State University; Martin Adamson, University of British 
Columbia; Dominique Adriaens, Ghent University; Ann Aguanno, Marymount 
Manhattan College; Shylaja Akkaraju, Bronx Community College of CUNY; Marc Albrecht, 
University of Nebraska; John Alcock, Arizona State University; Eric Alcorn, Acadia 
University; George R. Aliaga, T arrant County College; Philip Allman, Florida Gulf Coast 
College; Rodney Allrich, Purdue University; Richard Almon, State University of New Y ork, 
Buffalo; Bonnie Amos, Angelo State University; Katherine Anderson, University of 
California, Berkeley; Richard J. Andren, Montgomery County Community College; Estry 
Ang, University of Pittsburgh, Greensburg; Jeff Appling, Clemson University; J. David 
Archibald, San Diego State University; David Armstrong, University of Colorado, Boulder; 
Howard J. Arnott, University of T exas, Arlington; Mary Ashley, University of Illinois, 
Chicago; Angela S. Aspbury, T exas State University; Robert Atherton, University of 
Wyoming; Karl Aufderheide, T exas A&M University; Leigh Auleb, San Francisco State 
University; T erry Austin, Te mp l e  C o l l e g e; P . Stephen Baenziger, University of Nebraska; 
Brian Bagatto, University of Akron; Ellen Baker, Santa Monica College; Katherine Baker, 
Millersville University; Virginia Baker, Chipola College; Teri Balser, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison; William Barklow, Framingham State College; Susan Barman, Michigan State 
University; Steven Barnhart, Santa Rosa Junior College; Jim Barron, Montana State 
University Billings; Andrew Barton, University of Maine Farmington; Rebecca A. Bartow, 
W estern Kentucky University; Ron Basmajian, Merced College; David Bass, University of 
Central Oklahoma; Stephen Bauer, Belmont Abbey College; Bonnie Baxter, W estminster 
College; Tim Beagley, Salt Lake Community College; Margaret E. Beard, College of the Holy 
Cross; Tom Beatty, University of British Columbia; Chris Beck, Emory University; W ayne 
Becker, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Patricia Bedinger, Colorado State University; 
Jane Beiswenger, University of Wyoming; Anne Bekoff, University of Colorado, Boulder; 
Marc Bekoff, University of Colorado, Boulder; Tania Beliz, College of San Mateo; Adrianne 
Bendich, Hoffman-La Roche, Inc.; Marilee Benore, University of Michigan, Dearborn; 
Barbara Bentley, State University of New York, Stony Brook; Darwin Berg, University of 
California, San Diego; Werner Bergen, Michigan State University; Gerald Bergstrom, 
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Anna W . Berkovitz, Purdue University; Aimee Bernard, 
University of Colorado Denver; Dorothy Berner, Te mp l e  Un i ve r s i t y; Annalisa Berta, San 
Diego State University; Paulette Bierzychudek, Pomona College; Charles Biggers, Memphis 
State University; Teresa Bilinski, St. Edward’s University; Kenneth Birnbaum, New Y ork 
University; Sarah Bissonnette, University of California, Berkeley; Catherine Black, Idaho 
State University; Michael W . Black, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis  
Obispo; William Blaker, Furman University; Robert Blanchard, University of New 
Hampshire; Andrew R. Blaustein, Oregon State University; Judy Bluemer, Morton College; 
Edward Blumenthal, Marquette University; Robert Blystone, Trinity University;  
Robert Boley, University of Texas, Arlington; Jason E. Bond, East Carolina University; Eric 
Bonde, University of Colorado, Boulder; Cornelius Bondzi, Hampton University; Richard 
Boohar, University of Nebraska, Omaha; Carey L. Booth, Reed College; Allan Bornstein, 
Southeast Missouri State University; David Bos, Purdue University; Oliver Bossdorf, State 
University of New York, Stony Book; James L. Botsford, New Mexico State University; Lisa 
Boucher, University of Nebraska, Omaha; Jeffery Bowen, Bridgewater State University; J. 
Michael Bowes, Humboldt State University; Richard Bowker, Alma College; Robert Bowker, 
Glendale Community College, Arizona; Scott Bowling, Auburn University; Barbara 
Bowman, Mills College; Barry Bowman, University of California, Santa Cruz; Deric 
Bownds, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Robert Boyd, Auburn University; Sunny Boyd, 
University of Notre Dame; Jerry Brand, University of Texas, Austin; Edward Braun, Iowa State 
University; Theodore A. Bremner, Howard University; James Brenneman, University  
of Evansville; Charles H. Brenner, Berkeley, California; Lawrence Brewer, University of 
Kentucky; Donald P . Briskin, University of Illinois, Urbana; Paul Broady, University of 
Canterbury; Chad Brommer, Emory University; Judith L. Bronstein, University of Arizona; 
David Broussard, Lycoming College; Danny Brower, University of Arizona; Carole Browne, 
W ake Forest University; Beverly Brown, Nazareth College; Mark Browning, Purdue 
University; David Bruck, San Jose State University; Robb T. Brumfield, Louisiana State 
University; Herbert Bruneau, Oklahoma State University; Gary Brusca, Humboldt State 
University; Richard C. Brusca, University of Arizona, Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum; Alan 
H. Brush, University of Connecticut, Storrs; Howard Buhse, University of Illinois, Chicago; 
Arthur Buikema, Virginia Tech; Beth Burch, Huntington University; T essa Burch, 
University of T ennessee; Al Burchsted, College of Staten Island; W arren Burggren, 
University of North T exas; Meg Burke, University of North Dakota; Edwin Burling, De Anza 
College; Dale Burnside, Lenoir-Rhyne University; William Busa, Johns Hopkins University; 
Jorge Busciglio, University of California, Irvine; John Bushnell, University of Colorado; 
Linda Butler, University of T exas, Austin; David Byres, Florida Community College, 
Jacksonville; Patrick Cafferty, Emory University; Guy A. Caldwell, University of Alabama; 
Jane Caldwell, W est Virginia University; Kim A. Caldwell, University of Alabama; Ragan 
Callaway, The University of Montana; Kenneth M. Cameron, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison; R. Andrew Cameron, California Institute of T echnology; Alison Campbell, 
University of W aikato; Iain Campbell, University of Pittsburgh; Michael Campbell, 
Penn State University; Patrick Canary, Northland Pioneer College; W . Zacheus Cande, 
University of California, Berkeley; Deborah Canington, University of California, Davis; 
Robert E. Cannon, University of North Carolina, Greensboro; Frank Cantelmo, 
St. John’s University; John Capeheart, University of Houston, Downtown; Gregory Capelli, 
College of William and Mary; Cheryl Keller Capone, Pennsylvania State University; 
Twelfth Edition ReviewersSheena Abernathy, College of the Mainland; James Arnone, William Paterson 
University; Josh Auld, We st  C h e st e r  Un i ve r s i t y; Gemma Bartha, Springfield College; 
Louise Beard, University of Essex; Marin Beaupre, Massasoit Community College; Kevin 
Bennett, University of Hawai’i; Kelsie Bernot, North Carolina A&T State University; 
Christine Bezotte, Elmira College; Chris Bloch, Bridgewater State University; Aiwei 
Borengasser, University of Arkansas – Pulaski Tech; Robert Borgon, University of Central 
Florida; Nicole Bournias-Vardiabasis, California State University, San Bernardino; 
George Brooks, University of California, Berkeley; Michael Buoni, Delaware T echnical 
Community College; Kelcey Burris, Union High School; Elena Cainas, Broward College; 
Mickael Cariveau, Mount Olive College; Billy Carver, Lees-McRae College; Anne Casper, 
Eastern Michigan University; Bruce Chase, University of Nebraska, Omaha; Amanda 
Chau, Blinn College; Katie Clark, University of California, Riverside; Catharina Coenen, 
Allegheny College; Curt Coffman, Vincennes University; Juliet Collins, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison; Bob Cooper, Pennsbury High School; Robin Cotter, Phoenix College;  
Marilyn Cruz-Alvarez, Florida Gulf Coast University; Noelle Cutter, Molloy College; 
Deborah Dardis, Southeastern Louisiana University; Farahad Dastoor, University of 
Maine, Orono; Andrew David, Clarkson University; Jeremiah Davie, D’Y ouville College; 
Brian Deis, University of Hawai’i Jean DeSaix, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Kelly Dubois, Calvin College; Cynthia Eayre, Fresno City College; Arri Eisen, Emory 
University; Lisa Elfring, University of Arizona; Kurt Elliott, Northwest Vista College; 
Ana Esther Escandon, Los Angeles Harbor College; Linda Fergusson-Kolmes, Portland 
Community College; April Fong, Portland Community College; Robert Fowler, San Jose 
State University; Brittany Gasper, Florida Southern College; Carri Gerber, The Ohio  
State University; Marina Gerson, California State University, Stanislaus; Brian Gibbens, 
University of Minnesota; Sara Gremillion, Georgia Southern University; Ron Gross, 
Community College of Allegheny County; Melissa Gutierrez, University of Southern 
Mississippi; Gokhan Hacisalihoglu, Florida A&M University; Monica Hall-Woods, 
St. Charles Community College; Catherine Hartkorn, New Mexico State University; Valerie 
Haywood, Case W estern Reserve University; Maryann Herman, St. John Fisher College; 
Alexander Heyl, Adelphi University; Laura Hill, University of Vermont; Anne-Marie 
Hoskinson, South Dakota State University; Katriina Ilves, Pace University; James Jacob, 
Tompkins Cor t land Communit y College; Darrel James, Fred C. Beyer High School; Jerry 
Johnson, Corban University; Greg Jones, Santa Fe College; Kathryn Jones, Howard 
Community College; Seth Jones, University of Kentucky; Steven Karafit, University of 
Central Arkansas; Lori Kayes, Oregon State University; Ben Kolber, Duquesne University; 
Catherine Konopka, John Carroll University; Bill Kroll, Loyola University, Chicago; 
MaryLynne LaMantia, Golden W est College; Neil Lamb, HudsonAlpha Institute for 
Biotechnology; Michelle LaPorte, St. Louis Community College; Neil Lax, Duquesne 
University; John Lepri, Carrboro High School; Jani Lewis, State University of New Y ork 
at Geneseo; Eddie Lunsford, Southwestern Community College; Alyssa MacDonald, 
Leeward Community College; Charles Mallery, University of Miami; Marlee Marsh, 
Columbia College; Nicole McDaniels, Herkimer College; Mike Meighan, University of 
California, Berkeley; Jennifer Metzler, Ball State University; Grace Ju Miller, Indiana 
We s l e ya n  Un i ve r s i t y; Terry Miller, Central Carolina Community College; Shamone 
Mizenmayer, Central High School; Cam Muir, University of Hawai’i at Hilo; Heather 
Murdock, San Francisco State University; Madhavan Narayanan, Mercy College; 
Jennifer Nauen, University of Delaware; Karen Neal, J. Sargeant Reynolds Community 
College, Richmond; Leonore Neary, Joliet Junior College; Shanna Nifoussi, University  
of Superior; Jennifer Ortiz, North Hills School District; Fernanda Oyarzun, Universidad 
Católica de la Santísima Concepción, Chile; Stephanie Pandolfi, Wa y n e  St a t e  Un i ve r s i t y; 
John Plunket, Horry-Georgetown T echnical College; Elena Pravosudova, University 
of Nevada, Reno; Pushpa Ramakrishna, Chandler-Gilbert Community College; Sami 
Raut, University of Alabama, Birmingham; Robert Reavis, Glendale Community 
College; Linda Rehfuss, Bucks County Community College; Deborah Rhoden, Snead 
State Community College; Linda Richardson, Blinn College; Brian Ring, V aldosta 
State University; Rob Ruliffson, Minneapolis Community and T echnical College; Judy 
Schoonmaker, Colorado School of Mines; David Schultz, University of Louisville; 
David Schwartz, Houston Community College; Duane Sears, University of California, 
Santa Barbara; J. Michael Sellers, University of Southern Mississippi; Pramila Sen, 
Houston Community College; Jyotsna Sharma, University of Texas San Antonio; Joan 
Sharp, Simon Fraser University; Marcia Shofner, University of Maryland, College Park; 
Linda Sigismondi, University of Rio Grande; Davida Smyth, Mercy College; Helen 
Snodgrass, YES Prep North Forest; Ayodotun Sodipe, Te xa s  S o u t h e r n  Un i ve r s i t y; Kathy 
Sparace, Tri-County Technical College; Patricia Steinke, San Jacinto College Central; 
Elizabeth Sudduth, Georgia Gwinnett College; Aaron Sullivan, Houghton College; 
Yvonne Sun, University of Dayton; Andrea Swei, San Francisco State University; Greg  
Thurmon, Central Methodist University; Stephanie Toering-Peters, W artburg College;  
Monica Togna, Drexel University; Gail Tompkins, Wa ke  Te ch n i c a l  C o m m u n i t y  C o l l e ge;  
Tara Turley-Stoulig, Southeastern Louisiana University; Bishnu Twanabasu, 
We a t h e r fo rd  C o l l e ge; Erin Ventresca, Albright College; Wei Wan, T exas A&M 
University; Alan Wasmoen, Metropolitan Community College, Nebraska; Fred 
Wasser man, Boston University; Vicki Watson, University of Montana; Bill Wesley, 
Mars Area High School; Clay White, Lone Star College; Lisa Whitenack, Allegheny 
College; Larry Wimmers, Towson Universit y; Heather Woodson, Gaston College; 
Shelly Wu, Te xa s  C h r i s t i a n  Un i ve r s i t y; Mary Wuerth, Ta m a l p a i s  H i g h  S c h o o l; John 
Yo d e r,  University of Alabama; Alyson Zeamer, University of Texas San Antonio.
Reviewers
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   29 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 31 ===

30 REVIEWERS
Richard Cardullo, University of California, Riverside; Nina Caris, T exas A&M University; 
Mickael Cariveau, Mount Olive College; Jeffrey Carmichael, University of North Dakota; 
Robert Carroll, East Carolina University; Laura L. Carruth, Georgia State University; J. 
Aaron Cassill, University of T exas, San Antonio; Karen I. Champ, Central Florida 
Community College; David Champlin, University of Southern Maine; Brad Chandler, Palo 
Alto College; Wei-Jen Chang, Hamilton College; Bruce Chase, University of Nebraska, 
Omaha; P . Bryant Chase, Florida State University; Doug Cheeseman, De Anza College; 
Shepley Chen, University of Illinois, Chicago; Giovina Chinchar, Tougaloo College; Joseph 
P.  C h i n n i c i ,  Virginia Commonwealth University; Jung H. Choi, Georgia Institute of 
Te c h n o l o g y; Steve Christensen, Brigham Y oung University, Idaho; Geoffrey Church, 
Fairfield University; Henry Claman, University of Colorado Health Science Center; Anne 
Clark, Binghamton University; Greg Clark, University of T exas; Patricia J. Clark, Indiana 
University-Purdue University, Indianapolis; Ross C. Clark, Eastern Kentucky University; 
Lynwood Clemens, Michigan State University; Janice J. Clymer, San Diego Mesa College; 
Reggie Cobb, Nashville Community College; William P . Coffman, University of Pittsburgh; 
Austin Randy Cohen, California State University, Northridge; Bill Cohen, University of 
Kentucky; J. John Cohen, University of Colorado Health Science Center; James T . Colbert, 
Iowa State University; Sean Coleman, University of the Ozarks; Jan Colpaert, Hasselt 
University; Robert Colvin, Ohio University; Jay Comeaux, McNeese State University; David 
Cone, Saint Mary’s University; Erin Connolly, University of South Carolina; Elizabeth 
Connor, University of Massachusetts; Joanne Conover, University of Connecticut; Ron 
Cooper, University of California, Los Angeles; Gregory Copenhaver, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill; John Corliss, University of Maryland; James T. Costa, W estern 
Carolina University; Stuart J. Coward, University of Georgia; Charles Creutz, University of 
Toledo; Bruce Criley, Illinois W esleyan University; Norma Criley, Illinois W esleyan 
University; Joe W . Crim, University of Georgia; Greg Crowther, University of W ashington; 
Karen Curto, University of Pittsburgh; William Cushwa, Clark College; Anne Cusic, 
University of Alabama, Birmingham; Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State University; Curtis 
Daehler, University of Hawaii at Manoa; Marymegan Daly, The Ohio State University; 
W.  M a r s h a l l  D a rl ey,  University of Georgia; Douglas Darnowski, Indiana University 
Southeast; Cynthia Dassler, The Ohio State University; Shannon Datwyler, California State 
University, Sacramento; Marianne Dauwalder, University of T exas, Austin; Larry 
Davenport, Samford University; Bonnie J. Davis, San Francisco State University; Jerry 
Davis, University of Wisconsin, La Crosse; Michael A. Davis, Central Connecticut State 
University; Thomas Davis, University of New Hampshire; Melissa Deadmond, Truckee 
Meadows Community College; John Dearn, University of Canberra; Maria E. de Bellard, 
California State University, Northridge; Teresa DeGolier, Bethel College; James Dekloe, 
University of California, Santa Cruz; Eugene Delay, University of V ermont; Patricia A. 
DeLeon, University of Delaware; Veronique Delesalle, Gettysburg College; T . Delevoryas, 
University of T exas, Austin; Roger Del Moral, University of W ashington; Charles F . 
Delwiche, University of Maryland; Diane C. DeNagel, Northwestern University; William L. 
Dentler, University of Kansas; Jennifer Derkits, J. Sergeant Reynolds Community College; 
Daniel DerV artanian, University of Georgia; Jean DeSaix, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill; Janet De Souza-Hart, Massachusetts College of Pharmacy & Health Sciences; 
Biao Ding, Ohio State University; Michael Dini, T exas T ech University; Kevin Dixon, 
Florida State University; Andrew Dobson, Princeton University; Stanley Dodson, University 
of Wisconsin, Madison; Jason Douglas, Angelina College; Mark Drapeau, University of 
California, Irvine; John Drees, T emple University School of Medicine; Charles Drewes, Iowa 
State University; Marvin Druger, Syracuse University; Gary Dudley, University of Georgia; 
David Dunbar, Cabrini College; Susan Dunford, University of Cincinnati; Kathryn A. 
Durham, Lorain Community College; Betsey Dyer, Wheaton College; Robert Eaton, 
University of Colorado; Robert S. Edgar, University of California, Santa Cruz; Anna Edlund, 
Lafayette College; Douglas J. Eernisse, California State University, Fullerton; Betty J. 
Eidemiller, Lamar University; Brad Elder, Doane College; Curt Elderkin, College of New 
Jersey; William D. Eldred, Boston University; Michelle Elekonich, University of Nevada, 
Las V egas; George Ellmore, T ufts University; Mary Ellard-Ivey, Pacific Lutheran University; 
Kurt Elliott, North W est Vista College; Norman Ellstrand, University of California, 
Riverside; Johnny El-Rady, University of South Florida; Bert Ely, University of South 
Carolina; Dennis Emery, Iowa State University; John Endler, University of California, Santa 
Barbara; Rob Erdman, Florida Gulf Coast College; Dale Erskine, Lebanon V alley College; 
Margaret T. Erskine, Lansing Community College; Susan Erster, Stony Brook University; 
Gerald Esch, W ake Forest University; Frederick B. Essig, University of South Florida; Mary 
Eubanks, Duke University; David Evans, University of Florida; Robert C. Evans, Rutgers 
University, Camden; Sharon Eversman, Montana State University; Olukemi Fadayomi, 
Ferris State University; Lincoln Fairchild, Ohio State University; Peter Fajer, Florida State 
University; Bruce Fall, University of Minnesota; Sam Fan, Bradley University; Lynn Fancher, 
College of DuPage; Ellen H. Fanning, V anderbilt University; Paul Farnsworth, University of 
New Mexico; Larry Farrell, Idaho State University; Jerry F . Feldman, University of California, 
Santa Cruz; Lewis Feldman, University of California, Berkeley; Myriam Alhadeff Feldman, 
Cascadia Community College; Eugene Fenster, Longview Community College; Linda 
Fergusson-Kolmes, Portland Community College, Sylvania Campus; Russell Fernald, 
University of Oregon; Danilo Fernando, SUNY College of Environmental Science and 
Forestry, Syracuse; Rebecca Ferrell, Metropolitan State College of Denver; Christina Fieber, 
Horry-Georgetown T echnical College; Melissa Fierke, SUNY College of Environmental Science 
and Forestry; Kim Finer, Kent State University; Milton Fingerman, T ulane University; 
Barbara Finney, Regis College; Teresa Fischer, Indian River Community College; Frank Fish, 
W est Chester University; David Fisher, University of Hawaii, Manoa; Jonathan S. Fisher, 
St. Louis University; Steven Fisher, University of California, Santa Barbara; David Fitch, 
New Y ork University; Kirk Fitzhugh, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County; Lloyd 
Fitzpatrick, University of North T exas; William Fixsen, Harvard University; T . Fleming, 
Bradley University; Abraham Flexer, Manuscript Consultant, Boulder, Colorado; Mark 
Flood, Fairmont State University; Margaret Folsom, Methodist College; Kerry Foresman, 
University of Montana; Norma Fowler, University of T exas, Austin; Robert G. Fowler, 
San Jose State University; David Fox, University of T ennessee, Knoxville; Carl Frankel, 
Pennsylvania State University, Hazleton; Stewart Frankel, University of Hartford; Robert 
Franklin, College of Charleston; James Franzen, University of Pittsburgh; Art Fredeen, 
University of Northern British Columbia; Kim Fredericks, Viterbo University; Bill Freedman, 
Dalhousie University; Matt Friedman, University of Chicago; Otto Friesen, University of 
Virginia; Frank Frisch, Chapman University; Virginia Fry, Monterey Peninsula College; 
Bernard Frye, University of T exas, Arlington; Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern 
California; Alice Fulton, University of Iowa; Chandler Fulton, Brandeis University; Sara 
Fultz, Stanford University; Berdell Funke, North Dakota State University; Anne 
Funkhouser, University of the Pacific; Zofia E. Gagnon, Marist College; Michael Gaines, 
University of Miami; Cynthia M. Galloway, T exas A&M University, Kingsville; Arthur W . 
Galston, Y ale University; Stephen Gammie, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Carl Gans, 
University of Michigan; John Gapter, University of Northern Colorado; Andrea Gargas, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison; Lauren Garner, California Polytechnic State University, 
San Luis Obispo; Reginald Garrett, University of Virginia; Craig Gatto, Illinois State 
University; Kristen Genet, Anoka Ramsey Community College; Patricia Gensel, University 
of North Carolina; Chris George, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; 
Robert George, University of Wyoming; J. Whitfield Gibbons, University of Georgia; J. Phil 
Gibson, University of Oklahoma; Frank Gilliam, Marshall University; Eric Gillock, Fort 
Hayes State University; Simon Gilroy, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Edwin 
Ginés-Candelaria, Miami Dade College; Alan D. Gishlick, Gustavus Adolphus College; 
Todd Gleeson, University of Colorado; Jessica Gleffe, University of California, Irvine; John 
Glendinning, Barnard College; David Glenn-Lewin, Wichita State University; William 
Glider, University of Nebraska; Tricia Glidewell, Marist School; Elizabeth A. Godrick, 
Boston University; Jim Goetze, Laredo Community College; Lynda Goff, University of 
California, Santa Cruz; Elliott Goldstein, Arizona State University; Paul Goldstein, 
University of T exas, El Paso; Sandra Gollnick, State University of New Y ork, Buffalo; Roy 
Golsteyn, University of Lethbridge; Anne Good, University of California, Berkeley; Judith 
Goodenough, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Wayne Goodey, University of British 
Columbia; Barbara E. Goodman, University of South Dakota; Robert Goodman, University 
of Wisconsin, Madison; Ester Goudsmit, Oakland University; Linda Graham, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison; Robert Grammer, Belmont University; Joseph Graves, Arizona State 
University; Eileen Gregory, Rollins College; Phyllis Griffard, University of Houston, 
Downtown; A. J. F . Griffiths, University of British Columbia; Bradley Griggs, Piedmont 
Te c h n i c a l  C o l l e g e; William Grimes, University of Arizona; David Grise, T exas A&M 
University, Corpus Christi; Mark Gromko, Bowling Green State University; Serine Gropper, 
Auburn University; Katherine L. Gross, Ohio State University; Gary Gussin, University of 
Iowa; Edward Gruberg, T emple University; Carla Guthridge, Cameron University; Mark 
Guyer, National Human Genome Research Institute; Ruth Levy Guyer, Bethesda, Maryland; 
Carla Haas, Pennsylvania State University; R. Wayne Habermehl, Montgomery County 
Community College; Pryce Pete Haddix, Auburn University; Mac Hadley, University of 
Arizona; Joel Hagen, Radford University; Jack P . Hailman, University of Wisconsin; Leah 
Haimo, University of California, Riverside; Ken Halanych, Auburn University; Jody Hall, 
Brown University; Heather Hallen-Adams, University of Nebraska, Lincoln; Douglas 
Hallett, Northern Arizona University; Rebecca Halyard, Clayton State College; Devney 
Hamilton, Stanford University (student); E. William Hamilton, W ashington and Lee 
University; Matthew B. Hamilton, Georgetown University; Sam Hammer, Boston 
University; Penny Hanchey-Bauer, Colorado State University; William F . Hanna, Massasoit 
Community College; Dennis Haney, Furman University; Laszlo Hanzely, Northern Illinois 
University; Jeff Hardin, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Jean Hardwick, Ithaca College; 
Luke Harmon, University of Idaho; Lisa Harper, University of California, Berkeley; Deborah 
Harris, Case W estern Reserve University; Jeanne M. Harris, University of V ermont; Richard 
Harrison, Cornell University; Stephanie Harvey, Georgia Southwestern State University; 
Carla Hass, Pennsylvania State University; Chris Haufler, University of Kansas; Bernard A. 
Hauser, University of Florida; Chris Haynes, Shelton State Community College; Evan B. 
Hazard, Bemidji State University (emeritus); H. D. Heath, California State University, East 
Bay; George Hechtel, State University of New Y ork, Stony Brook; S. Blair Hedges, 
Pennsylvania State University; Brian Hedlund, University of Nevada, Las V egas; David 
Heins, T ulane University; Jean Heitz, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Andreas Hejnol, 
Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology; John D. Helmann, Cornell 
University; Colin Henderson, University of Montana; Susan Hengeveld, Indiana 
University; Michelle Henricks, University of California, Los Angeles; Caroll Henry, Chicago 
State University; Frank Heppner, University of Rhode Island; Albert Herrera, University of 
Southern California; Scott Herrick, Missouri W estern State College; Ira Herskowitz, 
University of California, San Francisco; Paul E. Hertz, Barnard College; Chris Hess, Butler 
University; David Hibbett, Clark University; R. James Hickey, Miami University; Karen 
Hicks, Kenyon College; Kendra Hill, San Diego State University; William Hillenius, College 
of Charleston; Kenneth Hillers, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; 
Ralph Hinegardner, University of California, Santa Cruz; William Hines, Foothill College; 
Robert Hinrichsen, Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Helmut Hirsch, State University of 
New York, Albany; Tuan-hua David Ho, W ashington University; Carl Hoagstrom, Ohio 
Northern University; Elizabeth Hobson, New Mexico State University; Jason Hodin, 
Stanford University; James Hoffman, University of V ermont; A. Scott Holaday, T exas T ech 
University; Mark Holbrook, University of Iowa; N. Michele Holbrook, Harvard University; 
James Holland, Indiana State University, Bloomington; Charles Holliday, Lafayette College; 
Lubbock Karl Holte, Idaho State University; Alan R. Holyoak, Brigham Y oung University, 
Idaho; Laura Hoopes, Occidental College; Nancy Hopkins, Massachusetts Institute of 
Te c h n o l o g y; Sandra Horikami, Daytona Beach Community College; Kathy Hornberger, 
Widener University; Pius F . Horner, San Bernardino V alley College; Becky Houck, University 
of Portland; Margaret Houk, Ripon College; Laura Houston, Northeast Lakeview College; 
Daniel J. Howard, New Mexico State University; Ronald R. Hoy, Cornell University; 
Sandra Hsu, Skyline College; Sara Huang, Los Angeles V alley College; Cristin Hulslander, 
University of Oregon; Donald Humphrey, Emory University School of Medicine; 
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   30 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 32 ===

 R E V I E W E R S  31
University; Karl Mattox, Miami University of Ohio; Joyce Maxwell, California State 
University, Northridge; Jeffrey D. May, Marshall University; Mike Mayfield, Ball State 
University; Kamau Mbuthia, Bowling Green State University; Lee McClenaghan, San Diego 
State University; Richard McCracken, Purdue University; Andrew McCubbin, W ashington 
State University; Kerry McDonald, University of Missouri, Columbia; Tanya McGhee, 
Craven Community College; Jacqueline McLaughlin, Pennsylvania State University, Lehigh 
Va l l e y; Neal McReynolds, T exas A&M International; Darcy Medica, Pennsylvania State 
University; Lisa Marie Meffert, Rice University; Susan Meiers, W estern Illinois University; 
Michael Meighan, University of California, Berkeley; Scott Meissner, Cornell University; 
Paul Melchior, North Hennepin Community College; Phillip Meneely, Haverford College; 
John Merrill, Michigan State University; Brian Metscher, University of California, Irvine; 
Jenny Metzler, Ball State University; Ralph Meyer, University of Cincinnati; James Mickle, 
North Carolina State University; Jan Mikesell, Gettysburg College; Roger Milkman, 
University of Iowa; Grace Miller, Indiana W esleyan University; Helen Miller, Oklahoma 
State University; John Miller, University of California, Berkeley; Jonathan Miller, Edmonds 
Community College; Kenneth R. Miller, Brown University; Mill Miller, Wright State 
University; Alex Mills, University of Windsor; Sarah Milton, Florida Atlantic University; Eli 
Minkoff, Bates College; John E. Minnich, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Subhash 
Minocha, University of New Hampshire; Michael J. Misamore, T exas Christian University; 
Kenneth Mitchell, T ulane University School of Medicine; Ivona Mladenovic, Simon Fraser 
University; Alan Molumby, University of Illinois, Chicago; Nicholas Money, Miami 
University; Russell Monson, University of Colorado, Boulder; Joseph P . Montoya, Georgia 
Institute of T echnology; Frank Moore, Oregon State University; Janice Moore, Colorado State 
University; Linda Moore, Georgia Military College; Randy Moore, Wright State University; 
William Moore, W ayne State University; Carl Moos, V eterans Administration Hospital, 
Albany, New York; Linda Martin Morris, University of W ashington; Michael Mote, T emple 
University; Alex Motten, Duke University; Jeanette Mowery, Madison Area T echnical 
College; Deborah Mowshowitz, Columbia University; Rita Moyes, T exas A&M, College 
Station; Darrel L. Murray, University of Illinois, Chicago; Courtney Murren, College of 
Charleston; John Mutchmor, Iowa State University; Elliot Myerowitz, California Institute 
of T echnology; Barbara Nash, Mercy College; Gavin Naylor, Iowa State University; John 
Neess, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Ross Nehm, Ohio State University; T om Neils, 
Grand Rapids Community College; Kimberlyn Nelson, Pennsylvania State University; 
Raymond Neubauer, University of T exas, Austin; Todd Newbury, University of California, 
Santa Cruz; James Newcomb, New England College; Jacalyn Newman, University of 
Pittsburgh; Harvey Nichols, University of Colorado, Boulder; Deborah Nickerson, 
University of South Florida; Bette Nicotri, University of W ashington; Caroline Niederman, 
Tomball College; Eric Nielsen, University of Michigan; Maria Nieto, California State 
University, East Bay; Anders Nilsson, University of Umeå; Greg Nishiyama, College of the 
Canyons; Charles R. Noback, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University; 
Jane Noble-Harvey, Delaware University; Mary C. Nolan, Irvine V alley College; Kathleen 
Nolta, University of Michigan; Peter Nonacs, University of California, Los Angeles; 
Mohamed A. F . Noor, Duke University; Shawn Nordell, St. Louis University; Richard S. 
Norman, University of Michigan, Dearborn (emeritus); David O. Norris, University of 
Colorado, Boulder; Steven Norris, California State University, Channel Islands; Gretchen 
North, Occidental College; Cynthia Norton, University of Maine, Augusta; Steve Norton, 
East Carolina University; Steve Nowicki, Duke University; Bette H. Nybakken, Hartnell 
College; Brian O’Conner, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Gerard O’Donovan, 
University of North T exas; Eugene Odum, University of Georgia; Mark P . Oemke, Alma 
College; Linda Ogren, University of California, Santa Cruz; Patricia O’Hern, Emory 
University; Olabisi Ojo, Southern University at New Orleans; Nathan O. Okia, Auburn 
University, Montgomery; Jeanette Oliver, St. Louis Community College, Florissant V alley; 
Gary P . Olivetti, University of V ermont; Margaret Olney, St. Martin’s College; John Olsen, 
Rhodes College; Laura J. Olsen, University of Michigan; Sharman O’Neill, University of 
California, Davis; Wan Ooi, Houston Community College; Aharon Oren, The Hebrew 
University; John Oross, University of California, Riverside; Rebecca Orr, Collin College; 
Catherine Ortega, Fort Lewis College; Charissa Osborne, Butler University; Gay Ostarello, 
Diablo V alley College; Henry R. Owen, Eastern Illinois University; Thomas G. Owens, 
Cornell University; Penny Padgett, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Kevin Padian, 
University of California, Berkeley; Dianna Padilla, State University of New Y ork, Stony Brook; 
Anthony T. Paganini, Michigan State University; Fatimata Pale, Thiel College; Barry 
Palevitz, University of Georgia; Michael A. Palladino, Monmouth University; Matt 
Palmtag, Florida Gulf Coast University; Stephanie Pandolfi, Michigan State University; 
Daniel Papaj, University of Arizona; Peter Pappas, County College of Morris; Nathalie 
Pardigon, Institut Pasteur; Bulah Parker, North Carolina State University; Stanton 
Parmeter, Chemeketa Community College; Susan Parrish, McDaniel College; Cindy 
Paszkowski, University of Alberta; Robert Patterson, San Francisco State University; Ronald 
Patterson, Michigan State University; Crellin Pauling, San Francisco State University; Kay 
Pauling, Foothill Community College; Daniel Pavuk, Bowling Green State University; Debra 
Pearce, Northern Kentucky University; Patricia Pearson, W estern Kentucky University; 
Andrew Pease, Stevenson University; Nancy Pelaez, Purdue University; Shelley Penrod, 
North Harris College; Imara Y . Perera, North Carolina State University; Beverly Perry, 
Houston Community College; Irene Perry, University of T exas of the Permian Basin; Roger 
Persell, Hunter College; Eric Peters, Chicago State University; Larry Peterson, University of 
Guelph; David Pfennig, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Mark Pilgrim, College of 
Coastal Georgia; David S. Pilliod, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; 
Vera M. Piper, Shenandoah University; Deb Pires, University of California, Los Angeles; J. 
Chris Pires, University of Missouri, Columbia; Jarmila Pittermann, University of California, 
Santa Cruz; Bob Pittman, Michigan State University; James Platt, University of Denver; 
Martin Poenie, University of T exas, Austin; Scott Poethig, University of Pennsylvania; 
Crima Pogge, San Francisco Community College; Michael Pollock, Mount Royal University; 
Roberta Pollock, Occidental College; Jeffrey Pommerville, T exas A&M University; 
Therese M. Poole, Georgia State University; Angela R. Porta, Kean University; Jason Porter, 
Catherine Hurlbut, Florida State College, Jacksonville; Diane Husic, Moravian College; 
Robert J. Huskey, University of Virginia; Steven Hutcheson, University of Maryland, 
College Park; Linda L. Hyde, Gordon College; Bradley Hyman, University of California, 
Riverside; Jeffrey Ihara, Mira Costa College; Mark Iked, San Bernardino V alley College; 
Cheryl Ingram-Smith, Clemson University; Erin Irish, University of Iowa; Sally Irwin, 
University of Hawaii, Maui College; Harry Itagaki, Kenyon College; Alice Jacklet, State 
University of New Y ork, Albany; John Jackson, North Hennepin Community College; 
Thomas Jacobs, University of Illinois; Kathy Jacobson, Grinnell College; Mark Jaffe, Nova 
Southeastern University; John C. Jahoda, Bridgewater State College; Douglas Jensen, 
Converse College; Jamie Jensen, Brigham Y oung University; Dan Johnson, East T ennessee 
State University; Lance Johnson, Midland Lutheran College; Lee Johnson, The Ohio State 
University; Randall Johnson, University of California, San Diego; Roishene Johnson, 
Bossier Parish Community College; Stephen Johnson, William Penn University; W ayne 
Johnson, Ohio State University; Kenneth C. Jones, California State University, Northridge; 
Russell Jones, University of California, Berkeley; Cheryl Jorcyk, Boise State University; Chad 
Jordan, North Carolina State University; Ann Jorgensen, University of Hawaii; Alan 
Journet, Southeast Missouri State University; Walter Judd, University of Florida; Ari 
Jumpponen, Kansas State University; Thomas W . Jurik, Iowa State University; Caroline M. 
Kane, University of California, Berkeley; Doug Kane, Defiance College; Thomas C. Kane, 
University of Cincinnati; The-Hui Kao, Pennsylvania State University; Tamos Kapros, 
University of Missouri; Kasey Karen, Georgia College & State University; E. L. Karlstrom, 
University of Puget Sound; David Kass, Eastern Michigan University; Jennifer Katcher, Pima 
Community College; Laura A. Katz, Smith College; Judy Kaufman, Monroe Community 
College; Maureen Kearney, Field Museum of Natural History; Eric G. Keeling, Cary Institute 
of Ecosystem Studies; Patrick Keeling, University of British Columbia; Thomas Keller, 
Florida State University; Elizabeth A. Kellogg, University of Missouri, St. Louis; Paul 
Kenrick, Natural History Museum, London; Norm Kenkel, University of Manitoba; Chris 
Kennedy, Simon Fraser University; George Khoury, National Cancer Institute; Stephen T . 
Kilpatrick, University of Pittsburgh at Johnstown; Rebecca T. Kimball, University of Florida; 
Shannon King, North Dakota State University; Mark Kirk, University of Missouri, 
Columbia; Robert Kitchin, University of Wyoming; Hillar Klandorf, W est Virginia 
University; Attila O. Klein, Brandeis University; Karen M. Klein, Northampton Community 
College; Daniel Klionsky, University of Michigan; Mark Knauss, Georgia Highlands College; 
Janice Knepper, Villanova University; Charles Knight, California Polytechnic State 
University; Jennifer Knight, University of Colorado; Ned Knight, Linfield College; Roger 
Koeppe, University of Arkansas; David Kohl, University of California, Santa Barbara; Greg 
Kopf, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Thomas Koppenheffer, Trinity 
University; Peter Kourtev, Central Michigan University; Margareta Krabbe, Uppsala 
University; Jacob Krans, W estern New England University; Anselm Kratochwil, Universität 
Osnabrück; Eliot Krause, Seton Hall University; Deborah M. Kristan, California State 
University, San Marcos; Steven Kristoff, Ivy T ech Community College; Dubear Kroening, 
University of Wisconsin; William Kroll, Loyola University, Chicago; Janis Kuby, San 
Francisco State University; Barbara Kuemerle, Case W estern Reserve University; Justin P . 
Kumar, Indiana University; Rukmani Kuppuswami, Laredo Community College; David 
Kurijaka, Ohio University; Lee Kurtz, Georgia Gwinnett College; Michael P . Labare, United 
States Military Academy, West Point; Marc-André Lachance, University of W estern Ontario; 
J. A. Lackey, State University of New Y ork, Oswego; Elaine Lai, Brandeis University; 
Mohamed Lakrim, Kingsborough Community College; Ellen Lamb, University of North 
Carolina, Greensboro; William Lamberts, College of St Benedict and St John’s University; 
William L’Amoreaux, College of Staten Island; Lynn Lamoreux, T exas A&M University; 
Carmine A. Lanciani, University of Florida; Kenneth Lang, Humboldt State University; Jim 
Langeland, Kalamazoo College; Dominic Lannutti, El Paso Community College; Allan 
Larson, W ashington University; Grace Lasker, Lake W ashington Institute of T echnology; 
John Latto, University of California, Santa Barbara; Diane K. Lavett, State University of 
New Y ork, Cortland, and Emory University; Charles Leavell, Fullerton College; C. S. Lee, 
University of T exas; Daewoo Lee, Ohio University; Tali D. Lee, University of Wisconsin, Eau 
Claire; Hugh Lefcort, Gonzaga University; Robert Leonard, University of California, 
Riverside; Michael R. Leonardo, Coe College; John Lepri, University of North Carolina, 
Greensboro; Donald Levin, University of T exas, Austin; Joseph Levine, Boston College; 
Mike Levine, University of California, Berkeley; Alcinda Lewis, University of Colorado, 
Boulder; Bill Lewis, Shoreline Community College; Jani Lewis, State University of New Y ork; 
John Lewis, Loma Linda University; Lorraine Lica, California State University, East Bay; 
Harvey Liftin, Broward Community College; Harvey Lillywhite, University of Florida, 
Gainesville; Graeme Lindbeck, V alencia Community College; Clark Lindgren, Grinnell 
College; Eric W . Linton, Central Michigan University; Diana Lipscomb, George W ashington 
University; Christopher Little, The University of T exas, Pan American; Kevin D. 
Livingstone, Trinity University; Andrea Lloyd, Middlebury College; Tatyana Lobova, Old 
Dominion University; Sam Loker, University of New Mexico; David Longstreth, Louisiana 
State University; Christopher A. Loretz, State University of New Y ork, Buffalo; Donald 
Lovett, College of New Jersey; Jane Lubchenco, Oregon State University; Douglas B. Luckie, 
Michigan State University; Hannah Lui, University of California, Irvine; Margaret A. Lynch, 
T ufts University; Steven Lynch, Louisiana State University, Shreveport; Lisa Lyons, Florida 
State University; Richard Machemer Jr., St. John Fisher College; Elizabeth Machunis-
Masuoka, University of Virginia; James MacMahon, Utah State University; Nancy Magill, 
Indiana University; Christine R. Maher, University of Southern Maine; Linda Maier, 
University of Alabama, Huntsville; Jose Maldonado, El Paso Community College; Richard 
Malkin, University of California, Berkeley; Charles Mallery, University of Miami; Keith 
Malmos, V alencia Community College, East Campus; Cindy Malone, California State 
University, Northridge; Mark Maloney, University of South Mississippi; Carol Mapes, 
Kutztown University of Pennsylvania; William Margolin, University of T exas Medical School; 
Lynn Margulis, Boston University; Julia Marrs, Barnard College (student); Kathleen A. 
Marrs, Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis; Edith Marsh, Angelo State 
University; Diane L. Marshall, University of New Mexico; Mary Martin, Northern Michigan 
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   31 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 33 ===

32 REVIEWERS
Science Center, San Antonio; John Stolz, California Institute of T echnology; Judy Stone, 
Colby College; Richard D. Storey, Colorado College; Stephen Strand, University of 
California, Los Angeles; Eric Strauss, University of Massachusetts, Boston; Antony 
Stretton, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Russell Stullken, Augusta College; Mark 
Sturtevant, Oakland University, Flint; John Sullivan, Southern Oregon State University; 
Gerald Summers, University of Missouri; Judith Sumner, Assumption College; Marshall 
D. Sundberg, Emporia State University; Cynthia Surmacz, Bloomsburg University; 
Lucinda Swatzell, Southeast Missouri State University; Daryl Sweeney, University of 
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana; Diane Sweeney, Punahou School; Samuel S. Sweet, 
University of California, Santa Barbara; Janice Swenson, University of North Florida; 
Michael A. Sypes, Pennsylvania State University; Lincoln Taiz, University of California, 
Santa Cruz; David Tam, University of North Texas; Yves Tan, Cabrillo College; Samuel 
Tarsitano, Southwest T exas State University; David Tauck, Santa Clara University; Emily 
Taylor, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; James Taylor, University of 
New Hampshire; John W . Taylor, University of California, Berkeley; Kristen Taylor, Salt 
Lake Community College; Martha R. Taylor, Cornell University; Franklyn Tan Te, Miami 
Dade College; Thomas Terry, University of Connecticut; Roger Thibault, Bowling Green 
State University; Kent Thomas, Wichita State University; Rebecca Thomas, College of 
St. Joseph; William Thomas, Colby-Sawyer College; Cyril Thong, Simon Fraser 
University; John Thornton, Oklahoma State University; Robert Thornton, University 
of California, Davis; William Thwaites, Tillamook Bay Community College; Stephen 
Timme, Pittsburg State University; Mike Toliver, Eureka College; Eric Toolson, 
University of New Mexico; Leslie Towill, Arizona State University; James Traniello, 
Boston University; Paul Q. Trombley, Florida State University; Nancy J. Trun, Duquesne 
University; Constantine Tsoukas, San Diego State University; Marsha Turell, Houston 
Community College; Victoria Turgeon, Furman University; Robert Tuveson, University 
of Illinois, Urbana; Maura G. Tyrrell, Stonehill College; Catherine Uekert, Northern 
Arizona University; Claudia Uhde-Stone, California State University, East Bay; Gordon 
Uno, University of Oklahoma; Lisa A. Urry, Mills College; Saba V aladkhan, Center for 
RNA Molecular Biology; James W . V alentine, University of California, Santa Barbara; 
Joseph V anable, Purdue University; Theodore V an Bruggen, University of South 
Dakota; Kathryn V andenBosch, T exas A&M University; Gerald V an Dyke, North 
Carolina State University; Brandi V an Roo, Framingham State College; Moira V an 
Staaden, Bowling Green State University; Martin V aughan, Indiana University-Purdue 
University Indianapolis; Sarah V anVickle-Chavez, W ashington University, St. Louis; 
William Velhagen, New Y ork University; Steven D. Verhey, Central W ashington 
University; Kathleen Verville, W ashington College; Sara Via, University of Maryland; 
Meena Vijayaraghavan, Tulane University; Frank Visco, Orange Coast College; Laurie 
Vitt, University of California, Los Angeles; Neal Voelz, St. Cloud State University; 
Thomas J. Volk, University of Wisconsin, La Crosse; Leif Asbjørn Vøllestad, University 
of Oslo; Amy Volmer, Swarthmore College; Janice Voltzow, University of Scranton; 
Margaret Voss, Penn State Erie; Susan D. Waaland, University of W ashington; Charles 
Wade, C.S. Mott Community College; William Wade, Dartmouth Medical College; John 
Waggoner, Loyola Marymount University; Jyoti Wagle, Houston Community College; 
Edward Wagner, University of California, Irvine; D. Alexander Wait, Southwest 
Missouri State University; Claire Walczak, Indiana University; Jerry Waldvogel, 
Clemson University; Dan Walker, San Jose State University; Robert Lee Wallace, Ripon 
College; Jeffrey Walters, North Carolina State University; Linda Walters, University of 
Central Florida; James Wandersee, Louisiana State University; James T. Warren Jr., 
Pennsylvania State University; Nickolas M. Waser, University of California, Riverside; 
Fred Wasserman, Boston University; Margaret Waterman, University of Pittsburgh; 
Charles Webber, Loyola University of Chicago; Peter Webster, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst; Terry Webster, University of Connecticut, Storrs; Beth Wee, 
Tulane Unive r sit y; James Wee, Loyola University, New Orleans; Andrea Weeks, George 
Mason University; John Weishampel, University of Central Florida; Peter Wejksnora, 
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Charles Wellman, Sheffield University; Kentwood 
Wells, University of Connecticut; David J. Westenberg, University of Missouri, Rolla; 
Richard Wetts, University of California, Irvine; Christopher Whipps, State University 
of New Y ork College of Environmental Science and Forestry; Jessica White-Phillip, Our 
Lady of the Lake University; Matt White, Ohio University; Philip White, James Hutton 
Institute; Susan Whittemore, Keene State College; Murray Wiegand, University of 
Winnipeg; Ernest H. Williams, Hamilton College; Kathy Williams, San Diego State 
University; Kimberly Williams, Kansas State University; Stephen Williams, Glendale 
Community College; Elizabeth Willott, University of Arizona; Christopher Wills, 
University of California, San Diego; Paul Wilson, California State University, Northridge; 
Fred Wilt, University of California, Berkeley; Peter Wimberger, University of Puget 
Sound; Robert Winning, Eastern Michigan University; E. William Wischusen, 
Louisiana State University; Clarence Wolfe, Northern Virginia Community College; 
Vickie L. Wolfe, Marshall University; Janet Wolkenstein, Hudson V alley Community 
College; Robert T. Woodland, University of Massachusetts Medical School; Joseph 
Woodring, Louisiana State University; Denise Woodward, Pennsylvania State 
University; Patrick Woolley, East Central College; Sarah E. Wyatt, Ohio University; 
Grace Wyngaard, James Madison University; Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute, Ramin Yadegari, University of Arizona; Paul Yancey, Whitman College;  
Philip Yant, University of Michigan; Linda Yasui, Northern Illinois University; Anne D. 
Yo d e r,  Duke University; Hideo Y onenaka, San Francisco State University; Robert Y ost, 
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis; Tia Y oung, Pennsylvania State 
University; Gina M. Zainelli, Loyola University, Chicago; Edward Zalisko, Blackburn 
College; Nina Zanetti, Siena College; Sam Zeveloff, Web e r  St a t e  Un i ve r s i t y; Zai Ming 
Zhao, University of Texas, Austin; John Zimmerman, Kansas State University; Miriam 
Zolan, Indiana University; Theresa Zucchero, Methodist University; Uko Zylstra, 
Calvin College.
University of the Sciences, Philadelphia; Warren Porter, University of Wisconsin; Daniel 
Potter, University of California, Davis; Donald Potts, University of California, Santa Cruz; 
Robert Powell, Avila University; Andy Pratt, University of Canterbury; David Pratt, 
University of California, Davis; Halina Presley, University of Illinois, Chicago; Eileen 
Preston, T arrant Community College Northwest; Mary V . Price, University of California, 
Riverside; Mitch Price, Pennsylvania State University; Steven Price, Virginia 
Commonwealth University; Terrell Pritts, University of Arkansas, Little Rock; Rong Sun Pu, 
Kean University; Rebecca Pyles, East T ennessee State University; Scott Quackenbush, 
Florida International University; Ralph Quatrano, Oregon State University; Peter Quinby, 
University of Pittsburgh; V al Raghavan, Ohio State University; Deanna Raineri, University of 
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana; David Randall, City University Hong Kong; Talitha Rajah, 
Indiana University Southeast; Charles Ralph, Colorado State University; Pushpa 
Ramakrishna, Chandler-Gilbert Community College; Thomas Rand, Saint Mary’s 
University; Monica Ranes-Goldberg, University of California, Berkeley; Samiksha Raut, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham; Robert S. Rawding, Gannon University; Robert H. 
Reavis, Glendale Community College; Kurt Redborg, Coe College; Ahnya Redman, 
Pennsylvania State University; Brian Reeder, Morehead State University; Bruce Reid, Kean 
University; David Reid, Blackburn College; C. Gary Reiness, Lewis & Clark College; Charles 
Remington, Y ale University; Erin Rempala, San Diego Mesa College; David Reznick, 
University of California, Riverside; Fred Rhoades, W estern W ashington State University; 
Douglas Rhoads, University of Arkansas; Eric Ribbens, W estern Illinois University; 
Christina Richards, New Y ork University; Sarah Richart, Azusa Pacific University; W ayne 
Rickoll, University of Puget Sound; Christopher Riegle, Irvine V alley College; Loren 
Rieseberg, University of British Columbia; Bruce B. Riley, T exas A&M University; T odd 
Rimkus, Marymount University; John Rinehart, Eastern Oregon University; Donna Ritch, 
Pennsylvania State University; Carol Rivin, Oregon State University East; Laurel Roberts, 
University of Pittsburgh; Diane Robins, University of Michigan; Kenneth Robinson, Purdue 
University; Thomas Rodella, Merced College; Luis Rodriguez, San Antonio College; Deb 
Roess, Colorado State University; Heather Roffey, Marianopolis College; Rodney Rogers, 
Drake University; Suzanne Rogers, Seton Hill University; William Roosenburg, Ohio 
University; Kara Rosch, Blinn College; Mike Rosenzweig, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University; Wayne Rosing, Middle T ennessee State University; Thomas Rost, University 
of California, Davis; Stephen I. Rothstein, University of California, Santa Barbara; John 
Ruben, Oregon State University; Albert Ruesink, Indiana University; Patricia Rugaber, 
College of Coastal Georgia; Scott Russell, University of Oklahoma; Jodi Rymer, College of 
the Holy Cross; Neil Sabine, Indiana University; Tyson Sacco, Cornell University; 
Glenn-Peter Saetre, University of Oslo; Rowan F . Sage, University of T oronto; Tammy Lynn 
Sage, University of T oronto; Sanga Saha, Harold W ashington College; Don Sakaguchi, Iowa 
State University; Walter Sakai, Santa Monica College; Per Salvesen, University of Bergen; 
Mark F . Sanders, University of California, Davis; Kathleen Sandman, Ohio State University; 
Davison Sangweme, University of North Georgia; Louis Santiago, University of California, 
Riverside; Ted Sargent, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; K. Sathasivan, University of 
Te xa s ,  Au s t i n; Gary Saunders, University of New Brunswick; Thomas R. Sawicki, 
Spartanburg Community College; Inder Saxena, University of T exas, Austin; Karin 
Scarpinato, Georgia Southern University; Carl Schaefer, University of Connecticut; Andrew 
Schaffner, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo; Maynard H. Schaus, Virginia Wesleyan College; 
Renate Scheibe, University of Osnabrück; Cara Schillington, Eastern Michigan University; 
David Schimpf, University of Minnesota, Duluth; William H. Schlesinger, Duke University; 
Mark Schlissel, University of California, Berkeley; Christopher J. Schneider, Boston 
University; Thomas W . Schoener, University of California, Davis; Robert Schorr, Colorado 
State University; Patricia M. Schulte, University of British Columbia; Karen S. Schumaker, 
University of Arizona; Brenda Schumpert, V alencia Community College; David J. 
Schwartz, Houston Community College; Carrie Schwarz, W estern W ashington University; 
Christa Schwintzer, University of Maine; Erik P . Scully, T owson State University; Robert W . 
Seagull, Hofstra University; Edna Seaman, Northeastern University; Duane Sears, 
University of California, Santa Barbara; Brent Selinger, University of Lethbridge; Orono 
Shukdeb Sen, Bethune-Cookman College; Wendy Sera, Seton Hill University; Alison M. 
Shakarian, Salve Regina University; Timothy E. Shannon, Francis Marion University; 
Victoria C. Sharpe, Blinn College; Elaine Shea, Loyola College, Maryland; Stephen 
Sheckler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Robin L. Sherman, Nova 
Southeastern University; Richard Sherwin, University of Pittsburgh; Alison Sherwood, 
University of Hawaii at Manoa; Lisa Shimeld, Crafton Hills College; James Shinkle, Trinity 
University; Barbara Shipes, Hampton University; Brian Shmaefsky, Lone Star College; 
Richard M. Showman, University of South Carolina; Eric Shows, Jones County Junior 
College; Peter Shugarman, University of Southern California; Alice Shuttey, DeKalb 
Community College; James Sidie, Ursinus College; Daniel Simberloff, Florida State 
University; Rebecca Simmons, University of North Dakota; Anne Simon, University of 
Maryland, College Park; Robert Simons, University of California, Los Angeles; Alastair 
Simpson, Dalhousie University; Susan Singer, Carleton College; Sedonia Sipes, Southern 
Illinois University, Carbondale; John Skillman, California State University, San Bernardino; 
Roger Sloboda, Dartmouth University; John Smarrelli, Le Moyne College; Andrew T . 
Smith, Arizona State University; Kelly Smith, University of North Florida; Nancy 
Smith-Huerta, Miami Ohio University; John Smol, Queen’s University; Andrew J. Snope, 
Essex Community College; Mitchell Sogin, Woods Hole Mar ine Biological Laborator y; Doug 
Soltis, University of Florida, Gainesville; Julio G. Soto, San Jose State University; Susan 
Sovonick-Dunford, University of Cincinnati; Rebecca Sperry, Salt Lake Community 
College; Frederick W . Spiegel, University of Arkansas; Clint Springer, Saint Joseph’s 
University; John Stachowicz, University of California, Davis; Joel Stafstrom, Northern 
Illinois University; Alam Stam, Capital University; Amanda Starnes, Emory University; 
Karen Steudel, University of Wisconsin; Barbara Stewart, Swarthmore College; 
Gail A. Stewart, Camden County College; Cecil Still, Rutgers University, New Brunswick; 
Margery Stinson, Southwestern College; James Stockand, University of T exas Health 
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   32 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 34 ===

 GLOBAL EDITION ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  33
Mohamad Faiz Foong Abdullah, Universiti T eknologi Mara
Zuhair Amr, Jordan University of Science and T echnology
Vivekanandhan Aravindhan, University of Madras
Mahathir Azahari
Sreeparna Banerjee, Middle East T echnical University
Dhriti Bhattacharyya, Ph.D.
David Bickford, National University of Singapore
Graham Bradley, Plymouth University
Paul Broady, University of Canterbury
Hannah Buckley, Lincoln University
Fabrice Caudron, Queen Mary University of London
Benny Chan, Academia Sinica
Samson Chimphango, University of Cape Town
L. M. Chu, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Said Damhoureyeh, The University of Jordan
Sumitra Datta, Amity University
Paul Dolman, University of East Anglia
Jonathan Eames, BirdLife International
Nagwa El-Badri, Zewail University of Science and T echnology
Johannes Enroth, University of Helsinki
Alan Feest, University of Bristol
Chris Finlay, University of Glasgow
Kathryn Ford, University of Bristol
Jeff Garnas, University of Pretoria
Hanan Adly Ghozlan, Alexandria University
David Glassom, University of KwaZulu-Natal
Nawroz O. Kareem, Keele University
Rajeev Kaul, University of Delhi
Sandeep Kaur-Ghumaan, University of Delhi
Peter Kirsop, The University of Edinburgh
Sarita Kumar, Acharya Narendra Dev College
Juan-Pablo Labrador, Trinity College Dublin
Colin Lawton, National University of Ireland, Galway
Hsin-Chen Lee, National Y ang-Ming University
Fabien Loison, Mahidol University
Dhanraj T. Masram, University of Delhi
Rudolf Meier, National University of Singapore
Neelu N. Nawani, Dr. D. Y. Patil Biotechnology & Bioinformatics Institute
Amina Nel, University of Johannesburg
Ashley Nicholas, University of KwaZulu-Natal
Yvonne Nyathi, University of Lincoln
Bruce Osborne, University College Dublin
Charlotte Packman, Wild Frontier Ecology Ltd.
Mary Rose Posa, National University of Singapore
Francisco Ramos-Morales, Universidad de Sevilla
Jouko Rikkinen, University of Helsinki
Raveenia Roberts-Hanna
Marco Roos, Naturalis Biodiversity Center and Leiden University
B!a"ej Rychlik, University of !ód"
Shweta Saran, Jawaharlal Nehru University
Cagan Sekercioglu
Liz Sheffield, University of Liverpool
Katie Smith, University of Y ork
Navjot Sodhi
Sarah L. Taylor, Keele University
Ravi Toteja, Acharya Narendra Dev College
Christiane V an den Branden, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Sandra V arga, University of Lincoln
C. J. Ward
Angela Mai-Yan Yuen, The University of Hong Kong
Global Edition Acknowledgments
Pearson would like to thank the following for contributing to and reviewing the Global Edition:
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   33 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 35 ===

Detailed Contents
CONCEPT 2.3 The formation and function of molecules and 
ionic compounds depend on chemical bonding between 
atoms 84
Covalent Bonds 8 4
Ionic Bonds 85
Weak Chemical Interactions 86
Molecular Shape and Function 8 7
CONCEPT 2.4 Chemical reactions make and break chemical 
bonds 88
 3 The Chemistry of Water 9 2
CONCEPT 3.1 Polar covalent bonds in water molecules result 
in hydrogen bonding 93
CONCEPT 3.2 Four emergent properties of water contribute 
to Earth’s suitability for life 93
Cohesion of Water Molecules 93
Moderation of Temperature by Water 9 4
Floating of Ice on Liquid Water 96
Water: The Solvent of Life 9 7
Possible Evolution of Life on Other Planets 98
CONCEPT 3.3 Acidic and basic conditions affect living 
organisms 99
Acids and Bases 99
The pH Scale 99
Buffers 1 0 0
Acidification: A Threat to Our Oceans 1 0 1
 1 Biology and Its Themes 5 0
CONCEPT 1.1 The study of life reveals unifying themes 51
Theme: New Properties Emerge at Successive Levels of Biological 
Organization 52
Theme: Life’s Processes Involve the Expression and Transmission of 
Genetic Information 5 4
Theme: Life Requires the Transfer and Transformation of Energy 
and Matter 5 7
Theme: From Molecules to Ecosystems, Interactions Are Important 
in Biological Systems 5 7
CONCEPT 1.2 The Core Theme: Evolution accounts for the 
unity and diversity of life 59
Classifying the Diversity of Life 60
Charles Darwin and the Theory of Natural Selection 62
The Tree of Life 6 3
CONCEPT 1.3 In studying nature, scientists form and test 
hypotheses 64
Exploration and Observation 65
Gathering and Analyzing Data 65
Forming and Testing Hypotheses 65
The Flexibility of the Scientific Process 66
A Case Study in Scientific Inquiry: Investigating Coat Coloration in 
Mouse Populations 68
V ariables and Controls in Experiments 68
Theories in Science 69
CONCEPT 1.4 Science benefits from a cooperative approach 
and diverse viewpoints 70
Building on the Work of Others 7 0
Science, Technology, and Society 7 1
The V alue of Diverse Viewpoints in Science 7 2
Unit 1 The Role of Chemistry in Biology 75
 2 Atoms and Molecules 7 6
CONCEPT 2.1 Matter consists of chemical elements in pure 
form and in combinations called compounds 77
Elements and Compounds 7 7
The Elements of Life 7 7
Case Study: Evolution of Tolerance to Toxic Elements 7 8
CONCEPT 2.2 An element’s properties depend on the 
structure of its atoms 78
Subatomic Particles 7 8
Atomic Number and Atomic Mass 79
Isotopes 79
The Energy Levels of Electrons 80
Electron Distribution and Chemical Properties 82
Electron Orbitals 83
 4 Carbon: The Basis of Molecular 
Diversity 1 0 4
CONCEPT 4.1 Organic chemistry is key to the origin  
of life 105
CONCEPT 4.2 Carbon atoms can form diverse molecules by 
bonding to four other atoms 106
The Formation of Bonds with Carbon 106
Molecular Diversity Arising from V ariation in Carbon 
Skeletons 108
CONCEPT 4.3 A few chemical groups are key to molecular 
function 110
The Chemical Groups Most Important in the Processes of Life 1 1 0
ATP: An Important Source of Energy for Cellular Processes 1 1 2
The Chemical Elements of Life: A Review 1 1 2
Interview: Kenneth Olden 75
34 DETAILED CONTENTS
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   34 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 36 ===

 DETAILED CONTENTS 35
 5 Biological Macromolecules 
and Lipids 1 1 4
CONCEPT 5.1 Macromolecules are polymers, built from 
monomers 115
The Synthesis and Breakdown of Polymers 1 1 5
The Diversity of Polymers 1 1 5
CONCEPT 5.2 Carbohydrates serve as fuel and building 
material 116
Sugars 1 1 6
Polysaccharides 1 1 8
CONCEPT 5.3 Lipids are a diverse group of hydrophobic 
molecules 120
Fats 1 2 0
Phospholipids 122
Steroids 123
CONCEPT 5.4 Proteins include a diversity of structures, 
resulting in a wide range of functions 123
Amino Acids (Monomers) 123
Polypeptides (Amino Acid Polymers) 126
Protein Structure and Function 126
CONCEPT 5.5 Nucleic acids store, transmit, and help express 
hereditary information 132
The Roles of Nucleic Acids 132
The Components of Nucleic Acids 132
Nucleotide Polymers 133
The Structures of DNA and RNA Molecules 1 3 4
CONCEPT 5.6 Genomics and proteomics have transformed 
biological inquiry and applications 134
DNA and Proteins as Tape Measures of Evolution 135
 7 Cell Structure and Function 1 6 3
CONCEPT 7.1 Biologists use microscopes and biochemistry to 
study cells 164
Microscopy 1 6 4
Cell Fractionation 166
CONCEPT 7.2 Eukaryotic cells have internal membranes that 
compartmentalize their functions 167
Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells 1 6 7
A Panoramic View of the Eukaryotic Cell 169
CONCEPT 7.3 The eukaryotic cell’s genetic instructions are 
housed in the nucleus and carried out by the ribosomes 1 7 2
The Nucleus: Information Central 1 7 2
Ribosomes: Protein Factories 1 7 2
CONCEPT 7.4 The endomembrane system regulates protein 
traffic and performs metabolic functions 174
The Endoplasmic Reticulum: Biosynthetic Factory 1 7 4
The Golgi Apparatus: Shipping and Receiving Center 1 7 5
Lysosomes: Digestive Compartments 1 7 7
V acuoles: Diverse Maintenance Compartments 1 7 8
The Endomembrane System: A Review 1 7 8
CONCEPT 7.5 Mitochondria and chloroplasts change energy 
from one form to another 179
The Evolutionary Origins of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts 179
Mitochondria: Chemical Energy Conversion 180
Chloroplasts: Capture of Light Energy 180
Peroxisomes: Oxidation 182
CONCEPT 7.6 The cytoskeleton is a network of fibers that 
organizes structures and activities in the cell 182
Roles of the Cytoskeleton: Support and Motility 182
Components of the Cytoskeleton 183
CONCEPT 7.7 Extracellular components and connections 
between cells help coordinate cellular activities 188
Cell Walls of Plants 188
The Extracellular Matrix (ECM) of Animal Cells 188
Cell Junctions 189
CONCEPT 7.8 A  c e l l  i s  g r e a t e r  t h a n  t h e  s u m  o f  i t s  p a r t s 191
 8 Cell Membranes 1 9 6
CONCEPT 8.1 Cellular membranes are fluid mosaics  
of lipids and proteins 197
The Fluidity of Membranes 198
Evolution of Differences in Membrane Lipid Composition 199
 6 Energy and Life 1 4 1
CONCEPT 6.1 An organism’s metabolism transforms matter 
and energy 142
Metabolic Pathways 142
Forms of Energy 142
The Laws of Energy Transformation 143
CONCEPT 6.2 The free-energy change of a reaction tells us 
whether or not the reaction occurs spontaneously 145
Free-Energy Change, #G 145
Free Energy, Stability, and Equilibrium 145
Free Energy and Metabolism 146
CONCEPT 6.3 ATP powers cellular work by coupling exergonic 
reactions to endergonic reactions 148
The Structure and Hydrolysis of ATP 148
How ATP Provides Energy That Performs Work 149
The Regeneration of ATP 1 5 1
CONCEPT 6.4 Enzymes speed up metabolic reactions by 
lowering energy barriers 151
The Activation Energy Barrier 1 5 1
How Enzymes Speed Up Reactions 152
Substrate Specificity of Enzymes 1 5 3
Catalysis in the Enzyme’s Active Site 1 5 4
Effects of Local Conditions on Enzyme Activity 155
The Evolution of Enzymes 1 5 7
CONCEPT 6.5 Regulation of enzyme activity helps control 
metabolism 157
Allosteric Regulation of Enzymes 158
Localization of Enzymes Within the Cell 1 5 9
Unit 2 Cell Biology 162
Interview: Diana Bautista 162
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   35 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 37 ===

36 DETAILED CONTENTS
 10 Cell Respiration 2 3 6
CONCEPT 10.1 Catabolic pathways yield energy by oxidizing 
organic fuels 237
Catabolic Pathways and Production of ATP 237
Redox Reactions: Oxidation and Reduction 237
The Stages of Cellular Respiration: A Preview 240
CONCEPT 10.2 Glycolysis harvests chemical energy by 
oxidizing glucose to pyruvate 242
CONCEPT 10.3 After pyruvate is oxidized, the citric acid 
cycle completes the energy-yielding oxidation of organic 
molecules 243
Oxidation of Pyruvate to Acetyl CoA 243
The Citric Acid Cycle 2 4 4
CONCEPT 10.4 During oxidative phosphorylation, 
chemiosmosis couples electron transport to ATP synthesis 246
The Pathway of Electron Transport 246
Chemiosmosis: The Energy-Coupling Mechanism 2 4 7
An Accounting of ATP Production by Cellular Respiration 249
CONCEPT 10.5 Fermentation and anaerobic respiration 
enable cells to produce ATP without the use of oxygen 251
Types of Fermentation 252
Comparing Fermentation with Anaerobic and Aerobic 
Respiration 253
The Evolutionary Significance of Glycolysis 254
CONCEPT 10.6 Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle connect to 
many other metabolic pathways 254
The Versatility of Catabolism 254
Biosynthesis (Anabolic Pathways) 255
Regulation of Cellular Respiration via Feedback Mechanisms 255
Membrane Proteins and Their Functions 199
The Role of Membrane Carbohydrates in Cell-Cell 
Recognition 2 0 0
Synthesis and Sidedness of Membranes 2 0 1
CONCEPT 8.2 Membrane structure results in selective 
permeability 201
The Permeability of the Lipid Bilayer 2 0 2
Transport Proteins 2 0 2
CONCEPT 8.3 Passive transport is diffusion of a substance 
across a membrane with no energy investment 202
Effects of Osmosis on Water Balance 2 0 3
Facilitated Diffusion: Passive Transport Aided by Proteins 2 0 5
CONCEPT 8.4 Active transport uses energy to move solutes 
against their gradients 206
The Need for Energy in Active Transport 206
How Ion Pumps Maintain Membrane Potential 2 0 7
Cotransport: Coupled Transport by a Membrane Protein 208
CONCEPT 8.5 Bulk transport across the plasma membrane 
occurs by exocytosis and endocytosis 209
Exocytosis 209
Endocytosis 209
 9 Cellular Signaling 2 1 4
CONCEPT 9.1 External signals are converted to responses 
within the cell 215
Evolution of Cell Signaling 2 1 5
Local and Long-Distance Signaling 2 1 7
The Three Stages of Cell Signaling: A Preview 2 1 8
CONCEPT 9.2 Signal reception: A signaling molecule binds to 
a receptor, causing it to change shape 219
Receptors in the Plasma Membrane 2 1 9
Intracellular Receptors 222
CONCEPT 9.3 Signal transduction: Cascades of molecular 
interactions transmit signals from receptors to relay molecules 
in the cell 2 2 3
Signal Transduction Pathways 223
Protein Phosphorylation and Dephosphorylation 224
Small Molecules and Ions as Second Messengers 225
CONCEPT 9.4 Cellular response: Cell signaling leads to 
regulation of transcription or cytoplasmic activities 228
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Responses 228
Regulation of the Response 228
CONCEPT 9.5 Apoptosis requires integration of multiple  
cell-signaling pathways 231
Apoptosis in the Soil Worm Caenorhabditis elegans 232
Apoptotic Pathways and the Signals That Trigger Them 232
 11 Photosynthetic Processes 2 5 9
CONCEPT 11.1 P h o t o s y n t h e s i s  f e e d s  t h e  b i o s p h e r e 260
CONCEPT 11.2 Photosynthesis converts light energy to the 
chemical energy of food 261
Chloroplasts: The Sites of Photosynthesis in Plants 261
Tracking Atoms Through Photosynthesis 261
The Two Stages of Photosynthesis: A Preview 263
CONCEPT 11.3 The light reactions convert solar energy to the 
chemical energy of ATP and NADPH 264
The Nature of Sunlight 264
Photosynthetic Pigments: The Light Receptors 264
Excitation of Chlorophyll by Light 267
A Photosystem: A Reaction-Center Complex Associated with  
Light-Harvesting Complexes 267
Linear Electron Flow 269
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   36 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 38 ===

 12 M i t o s i s 2 8 4
CONCEPT 12.1 Most cell division results in genetically 
identical daughter cells 285
Key Roles of Cell Division 285
Cellular Organization of the Genetic Material 285
Distribution of Chromosomes During Eukaryotic Cell Division 2 8 6
CONCEPT 12.2 The mitotic phase alternates with interphase in 
the cell cycle 287
Phases of the Cell Cycle 287
The Mitotic Spindle: A Closer Look 290
Cytokinesis: A Closer Look 291
Binary Fission in Bacteria 292
The Evolution of Mitosis 293
CONCEPT 12.3 The eukaryotic cell cycle is regulated by a 
molecular control system 294
The Cell Cycle Control System 294
Loss of Cell Cycle Controls in Cancer Cells 298
 DETAILED CONTENTS 37
 13 Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 3 0 4
CONCEPT 13.1 Offspring acquire genes from parents by 
inheriting chromosomes 305
Inheritance of Genes 305
Comparison of Asexual and Sexual Reproduction 305
CONCEPT 13.2 Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life 
cycles 306
Sets of Chromosomes in Human Cells 306
Behavior of Chromosome Sets in the Human Life Cycle 307
The V ariety of Sexual Life Cycles 308
CONCEPT 13.3 Meiosis reduces the number of chromosome 
sets from diploid to haploid 309
The Stages of Meiosis 309
Crossing Over and Synapsis During Prophase I 3 1 2
A Comparison of Mitosis and Meiosis 3 1 2
CONCEPT 13.4 Genetic variation produced in sexual life cycles 
contributes to evolution 315
Origins of Genetic V ariation Among Offspring 3 1 5
The Evolutionary Significance of Genetic V ariation Within 
Populations 3 1 6
 14 Mendelian Genetics 3 1 9
CONCEPT 14.1 Mendel used the scientific approach to 
identify two laws of inheritance 320
Mendel’s Experimental, Quantitative Approach 320
The Law of Segregation 321
The Law of Independent 
Assortment 324
CONCEPT 14.2 Probability 
laws govern Mendelian 
inheritance 326
The Multiplication and Addition 
Rules Applied to Monohybrid 
Crosses 327
Solving Complex Genetics 
Problems with the Rules  
of Probability 327
CONCEPT 14.3 Inheritance patterns are often more complex 
than predicted by simple Mendelian genetics 328
Extending Mendelian Genetics for a Single Gene 328
Extending Mendelian Genetics for Two or More Genes 331
Nature and Nurture: The Environmental Impact on 
Phenotype 332
A Mendelian View of Heredity and V ariation 332
CONCEPT 14.4 Many human traits follow Mendelian  
patterns of inheritance 334
Pedigree Analysis 334
Recessively Inherited Disorders 335
Dominantly Inherited Disorders 337
Multifactorial Disorders 337
Genetic Testing and Counseling 337
 15 Linkage and Chromosomes 3 4 4
CONCEPT 15.1 Mendelian inheritance has its physical basis in 
the behavior of chromosomes 345
Morgan’s Choice of Experimental Organism 345
Correlating Behavior of a Gene’s Alleles with Behavior of a 
Chromosome Pair: Scientific Inquiry 345
CONCEPT 15.2 Sex-linked genes exhibit unique patterns of 
inheritance 348
The Chromosomal Basis of Sex 348
Inheritance of X-Linked Genes 349
X Inactivation in Female Mammals 350
Cyclic Electron Flow 2 7 0
A Comparison of Chemiosmosis in Chloroplasts and 
Mitochondria 2 7 1
CONCEPT 11.4 The Calvin cycle uses the chemical energy of 
ATP and NADPH to reduce CO2 to sugar 273
CONCEPT 11.5 Alternative mechanisms of carbon fixation 
have evolved in hot, arid climates 275
Photorespiration: An Evolutionary Relic? 2 7 5
C4 Plants 2 7 5
CAM Plants 2 7 7
CONCEPT 11.6 Photosynthesis is essential for life on Earth: a 
review 278
Unit 3 The Genetic Basis of Life 303
Interview: Francisco Mojica 303
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   37 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 39 ===

CONCEPT 17.4 Translation is the RNA-directed synthesis of a 
polypeptide: A Closer Look 397
Molecular Components of Translation 398
Building a Polypeptide 400
Completing and Targeting the Functional Protein 402
Making Multiple Polypeptides in Bacteria and Eukaryotes 405
CONCEPT 17.5 Mutations of one or a few nucleotides can 
affect protein structure and function 407
Types of Small-Scale Mutations 407
New Mutations and Mutagens 4 1 0
Using CRISPR to Edit Genes and Correct Disease-Causing 
Mutations 4 1 0
What Is a Gene? Revisiting the Question 4 1 1
 18 Control of Gene Expression 4 1 5
CONCEPT 18.1 Bacteria often respond to environmental 
change by regulating transcription 416
Operons: The Basic Concept 4 1 6
Repressible and Inducible Operons: Two Types of Negative Gene 
Regulation 4 1 8
Positive Gene Regulation 4 1 9
CONCEPT 18.2 Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated at 
many stages 420
Differential Gene Expression 420
Regulation of Chromatin Structure 421
Regulation of Transcription Initiation 423
Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional Regulation 427
CONCEPT 18.3 Noncoding RNAs play multiple roles in 
controlling gene expression 429
Effects on mRNAs by MicroRNAs and Small Interfering RNAs 429
Chromatin Remodeling and Effects on Transcription by 
ncRNAs 430
CONCEPT 18.4 A program of differential gene expression 
leads to the different cell types in a multicellular organism 431
A Genetic Program for Embryonic Development 431
Cytoplasmic Determinants and Inductive Signals 432
Sequential Regulation of Gene Expression During Cellular 
Differentiation 433
Pattern Formation: Setting Up the Body Plan 434
CONCEPT 18.5 Cancer results from genetic changes that affect 
cell cycle control 438
Types of Genes Associated with Cancer 438
Interference with Normal Cell-Signaling  
Pathways 439
The Multistep Model of Cancer Development 4 4 1
Inherited Predisposition and Environmental Factors Contributing 
to Cancer 4 4 4
The Role of Viruses in Cancer 4 4 4
 19 D N A  T e c h n o l o g y 4 4 9
CONCEPT 19.1 DNA sequencing and DNA cloning are 
valuable tools for genetic engineering and biological 
inquiry 450
DNA Sequencing 450
Making Multiple Copies of a Gene or Other DNA  
Segment 452
Using Restriction Enzymes to Make a Recombinant DNA 
Plasmid 453
CONCEPT 15.3 Linked genes tend to be inherited together 
because they are located near each other on the same 
chromosome 351
How Linkage Affects Inheritance 351
Genetic Recombination and Linkage 352
Mapping the Distance Between Genes Using Recombination Data: 
Scientific Inquiry 355
CONCEPT 15.4 Alterations of chromosome number or 
structure cause some genetic disorders 356
Abnormal Chromosome Number 357
Alterations of Chromosome Structure 357
Human Conditions Due to Chromosomal Alterations 358
CONCEPT 15.5 Some inheritance patterns are exceptions to 
standard Mendelian inheritance 360
Genomic Imprinting 360
Inheritance of Organelle Genes 361
38 DETAILED CONTENTS
 16 Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 3 6 4
CONCEPT 16.1 D N A  i s  t h e  g e n e t i c  m a t e r i a l 365
The Search for the Genetic Material: Scientific Inquiry 365
Building a Structural Model of DNA 367
CONCEPT 16.2 Many proteins work together in DNA 
replication and repair 370
The Basic Principle: Base Pairing to a Template Strand 3 7 1
DNA Replication: A Closer Look 3 7 2
Proofreading and Repairing DNA 3 7 7
Evolutionary Significance of Altered DNA Nucleotides 3 7 8
Replicating the Ends of DNA Molecules 3 7 8
CONCEPT 16.3 A chromosome consists of a DNA molecule 
packed together with proteins 380
 17 Expression of Genes 3 8 5
CONCEPT 17.1 Genes specify proteins via transcription and 
translation 386
Evidence from Studying Metabolic Defects 386
Basic Principles of Transcription and Translation 387
The Genetic Code 390
CONCEPT 17.2 Transcription is the DNA-directed synthesis of 
RNA: A Closer Look 392
Molecular Components of Transcription 392
Synthesis of an RNA Transcript 392
CONCEPT 17.3 Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after 
transcription 395
Alteration of mRNA Ends 395
Split Genes and RNA Splicing 395
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   38 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 40 ===

 22 Phylogenetic Reconstruction 5 2 1
CONCEPT 22.1 Phylogenies show evolutionary 
relationships 522
Binomial Nomenclature 522
Hierarchical Classification 522
Linking Classification and Phylogeny 523
What We Can and Cannot Learn from Phylogenetic Trees 523
Applying Phylogenies 525
CONCEPT 22.2 Phylogenies are inferred from morphological 
and molecular data 526
Morphological and Molecular Homologies 526
Sorting Homology from Analogy 526
Evaluating Molecular Homologies 527
CONCEPT 22.3 Shared characters are used to construct 
phylogenetic trees 527
Cladistics 527
Phylogenetic Trees with Proportional Branch Lengths 529
Maximum Parsimony and Maximum Likelihood 530
Phylogenetic Trees as Hypotheses 532
CONCEPT 22.4 An organism’s evolutionary history is 
documented in its genome 533
Gene Duplications and Gene Families 533
Genome Evolution 5 3 4
CONCEPT 22.5 Molecular clocks help track evolutionary 
time 534
Molecular Clocks 5 3 4
Applying a Molecular Clock: Dating the Origin of HIV 535
CONCEPT 22.6 Our understanding of the tree of life  
continues to change based on new data 536
From Two Kingdoms to Three Domains 536
The Important Role of Horizontal Gene Transfer 536
 DETAILED CONTENTS 39
Amplifying DNA: The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Its 
Use in DNA Cloning 454
Expressing Cloned Eukaryotic Genes 456
CONCEPT 19.2 Biologists use DNA technology to study gene 
expression and function 457
Analyzing Gene Expression 457
Determining Gene Function 460
CONCEPT 19.3 Cloned organisms and stem cells are useful for 
basic research and other applications 462
Cloning Plants: Single-Cell Cultures 462
Cloning Animals: Nuclear Transplantation 462
Stem Cells of Animals 464
CONCEPT 19.4 The practical applications of DNA-based 
biotechnology affect our lives in many ways 467
Medical Applications 467
Forensic Evidence and Genetic Profiles 4 7 0
Environmental Cleanup 4 7 1
Agricultural Applications 4 7 1
Safety and Ethical Questions Raised by DNA Technology 4 7 2
 20 The Evolution of Genomes 4 7 6
CONCEPT 20.1 The Human Genome Project fostered 
development of faster, less expensive sequencing 
techniques 477
CONCEPT 20.2 Scientists use bioinformatics to analyze 
genomes and their functions 478
Centralized Resources for Analyzing Genome Sequences 4 7 8
Identifying Protein-Coding Genes and Understanding Their 
Functions 479
Understanding Genes and Gene Expression at the Systems Level 4 8 0
CONCEPT 20.3 Genomes vary in size, number of genes,  
and gene density 482
Genome Size 482
Number of Genes 483
Gene Density and Noncoding DNA 483
CONCEPT 20.4 Multicellular eukaryotes have a lot of 
noncoding DNA and many multigene families 484
Transposable Elements and Related Sequences 485
Other Repetitive DNA, Including Simple Sequence DNA 486
Genes and Multigene Families 486
CONCEPT 20.5 Duplication, rearrangement, and mutation of 
DNA contribute to genome evolution 488
Duplication of Entire Chromosome Sets 488
Alterations of Chromosome 
Structure 488
Duplication and Divergence of Gene-
Sized Regions of DNA 489
Rearrangements of Parts of Genes: 
Exon Duplication and Exon 
Shuffling 490
How Transposable Elements 
Contribute to Genome 
Evolution 493
CONCEPT 20.6 Comparing genome 
sequences provides clues to 
evolution and development 493
Comparing Genomes 493
Widespread Conservation of 
Developmental Genes Among 
Animals 497
 21 How Evolution Works 5 0 2
CONCEPT 21.1 The Darwinian revolution challenged 
traditional views of a young Earth inhabited by unchanging 
species 503
Endless Forms Most Beautiful 503
Scala Naturae and Classification of Species 504
Ideas About Change over Time 504
Lamarck’s Hypothesis of Evolution 505
CONCEPT 21.2 Descent with modification by natural selection 
explains the adaptations of organisms and the unity and 
diversity of life 505
Darwin’s Research 505
Ideas from The Origin of Species 507
Key Features of Natural Selection 5 1 0
CONCEPT 21.3 Evolution is supported by an overwhelming 
amount of scientific evidence 510
Direct Observations of Evolutionary Change 5 1 1
Homology 5 1 3
The Fossil Record 5 1 5
Biogeography 5 1 6
What Is Theoretical About Darwin’s View of Life? 5 1 7
Unit 4 Evolution 501
Interview: Cassandra Extavour 501
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   39 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 41 ===

40 DETAILED CONTENTS
 25 M a c r o e v o l u t i o n 581
CONCEPT 25.1 Conditions 
on early Earth made the 
origin of life possible 582
Synthesis of Organic 
Compounds on Early 
Earth 582
Abiotic Synthesis of 
Macromolecules 583
Protocells 583
Self-Replicating RNA 584
CONCEPT 25.2 The fossil 
record documents the 
history of life 584
The Fossil Record 585
How Rocks and Fossils Are Dated 585
The Origin of New Groups of Organisms 586
CONCEPT 25.3 Key events in life’s history include the 
origins of unicellular and multicellular organisms and the 
colonization of land 588
The First Single-Celled Organisms 589
The Origin of Multicellularity 5 9 1
The Colonization of Land 592
CONCEPT 25.4 The rise and fall of groups of organisms reflect 
differences in speciation and extinction rates 593
Plate Tectonics 5 9 4
Mass Extinctions 596
Adaptive Radiations 598
CONCEPT 25.5 Major changes in body form can result from 
changes in the sequences and regulation of developmental 
genes 600
Effects of Developmental Genes 600
The Evolution of Development 601
CONCEPT 25.6 Evolution is not goal oriented 603
Evolutionary Novelties 603
Evolutionary Trends 604
 23 M i c r o e v o l u t i o n 5 4 2
CONCEPT 23.1 Genetic variation makes evolution 
possible 543
Genetic V ariation 543
Sources of Genetic V ariation 5 4 4
CONCEPT 23.2 The Hardy-Weinberg equation can be used to 
test whether a population is evolving 545
Gene Pools and Allele Frequencies 546
The Hardy-Weinberg Equation 546
CONCEPT 23.3 Natural selection, genetic drift, and gene flow 
can alter allele frequencies in a population 549
Natural Selection 550
Genetic Drift 550
Gene Flow 552
CONCEPT 23.4 Natural selection is the only mechanism that 
consistently causes adaptive evolution 553
Natural Selection: A Closer Look 553
The Key Role of Natural Selection in Adaptive  
Evolution 554
Sexual Selection 555
Balancing Selection 556
Why Natural Selection Cannot Fashion Perfect  
Organisms 557
 24 Species and Speciation 5 6 2
CONCEPT 24.1 The biological species concept emphasizes 
reproductive isolation 563
The Biological Species Concept 563
Other Definitions of Species 566
CONCEPT 24.2 Speciation can take place with or without 
geographic separation 567
Allopatric (“Other Country”) Speciation 567
Sympatric (“Same Country”) Speciation 569
Allopatric and Sympatric Speciation: A Review 5 7 2
CONCEPT 24.3 Hybrid zones reveal factors that cause 
reproductive isolation 572
Patterns Within Hybrid Zones 5 7 2
Hybrid Zones and Environmental Change 5 7 3
Hybrid Zones over Time 5 7 4
CONCEPT 24.4 Speciation can occur rapidly or slowly and can 
result from changes in few or many genes 576
The Time Course of Speciation 5 7 6
Studying the Genetics of Speciation 5 7 8
From Speciation to Macroevolution 579
Unit 5   The Diversity of Life 609
Interview: Penny Chisholm 609
26 Introduction to Viruses 6 1 0
CONCEPT 26.1 A virus consists of a nucleic acid surrounded 
by a protein coat 611
The Discovery of Viruses: Scientific Inquiry 6 1 1
Structure of Viruses 6 1 1
CONCEPT 26.2 V i r u s e s  r e p l i c a t e  o n l y  i n  h o s t  c e l l s 613
General Features of Viral Replicative Cycles 6 1 3
Replicative Cycles of Phages 6 1 4
Replicative Cycles of Animal Viruses 6 1 6
Evolution of Viruses 6 1 8
CONCEPT 26.3 Viruses and prions are formidable pathogens 
in animals and plants 620
Viral Diseases in Animals 620
Emerging Viral Diseases 621
Viral Diseases in Plants 624
Prions: Proteins as Infectious Agents 624
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   40 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 42 ===

CONCEPT 28.3 SAR is a highly diverse group of protists 
defined by DNA similarities 655
Stramenopiles 656
Alveolates 658
Rhizarians 660
CONCEPT 28.4 Red algae and green algae are the closest 
relatives of plants 663
Red Algae 663
Green Algae 664
CONCEPT 28.5 Unikonts include protists that are closely 
related to fungi and animals 665
Amoebozoans 666
Opisthokonts 667
CONCEPT 28.6 Protists play key roles in ecological 
communities 668
Symbiotic Protists 668
Photosynthetic Protists 668
 29 Nonvascular and Seedless  
Vascular Plants 6 7 2
CONCEPT 29.1 Plants evolved from green algae 673
Evidence of Algal Ancestry 6 7 3
Adaptations Enabling the Move to Land 6 7 3
Derived Traits of Plants 6 7 5
The Origin and Diversification of Plants 6 7 5
CONCEPT 29.2 Mosses and other nonvascular plants have life 
cycles dominated by gametophytes 677
Bryophyte Gametophytes 6 7 8
Bryophyte Sporophytes 679
The Ecological and Economic Importance of Mosses 681
CONCEPT 29.3 Ferns and other seedless vascular plants were 
the first plants to grow tall 683
Origins and Traits of V ascular Plants 683
Classification of Seedless V ascular Plants 685
The Significance of Seedless V ascular Plants 687
 30 Seed Plants 6 9 0
CONCEPT 30.1 Seeds and pollen grains are key adaptations 
for life on land 691
Advantages of Reduced Gametophytes 691
Heterospory: The Rule Among Seed Plants 692
 27 P r o k a r y o t e s 6 2 7
CONCEPT 27.1 Structural and functional adaptations 
contribute to prokaryotic success 628
Cell-Surface Structures 628
Motility 630
Internal Organization and DNA 6 3 1
Reproduction 6 3 1
CONCEPT 27.2 Rapid reproduction, mutation, and genetic 
recombination promote genetic diversity in prokaryotes 632
Rapid Reproduction and Mutation 632
Genetic Recombination 633
CONCEPT 27.3 Diverse nutritional and metabolic adaptations 
have evolved in prokaryotes 635
The Role of Oxygen in Metabolism 636
Nitrogen Metabolism 636
Metabolic Cooperation 636
CONCEPT 27.4 Prokaryotes have radiated into a diverse set  
of lineages 637
An Overview of Prokaryotic Diversity 6 3 7
Bacteria 6 3 7
Archaea 639
CONCEPT 27.5 Prokaryotes play crucial roles in the 
biosphere 640
Chemical Recycling 640
Ecological Interactions 6 4 1
CONCEPT 27.6 Prokaryotes have both beneficial and harmful 
impacts on humans 641
Mutualistic Bacteria 6 4 1
Pathogenic Bacteria 642
Antibiotic Resistance 642
Prokaryotes in Research and Technology 643
 28 The Origin and Evolution  
of Eukaryotes 6 4 7
CONCEPT 28.1 Most eukaryotes are single-celled 
organisms 648
Structural and Functional Diversity in Protists 648
Endosymbiosis in Eukaryotic Evolution 648
Four Supergroups of Eukaryotes 651
CONCEPT 28.2 Excavates include protists with modified 
mitochondria and protists with unique flagella 651
Diplomonads and Parabasalids 654
Euglenozoans 654
 DETAILED CONTENTS 41
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   41 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 43 ===

CONCEPT 31.5 Fungi play key roles in nutrient cycling, 
ecological interactions, and human welfare 721
Fungi as Decomposers 7 2 1
Fungi as Mutualists 7 2 1
Practical Uses of Fungi 7 2 4
 32 An Introduction to Animal 
Diversity 7 2 7
CONCEPT 32.1 Animals are multicellular, heterotrophic 
eukaryotes with tissues that develop from embryonic 
layers 728
Nutritional Mode 728
Cell Structure and Specialization 728
Reproduction and Development 728
CONCEPT 32.2 The history of animals spans more than half a 
billion years 729
Steps in the Origin of Multicellular Animals 729
Neoproterozoic Era (1 Billion–541 Million Y ears Ago) 730
Paleozoic Era (541–252 Million Y ears Ago) 7 3 1
Mesozoic Era (252–66 Million Y ears Ago) 733
Cenozoic Era (66 Million Y ears Ago to the Present) 733
CONCEPT 32.3 Animals can be characterized by body 
plans 733
Symmetry 733
Tissues 733
Body Cavities 7 3 4
Protostome and Deuterostome Development 735
CONCEPT 32.4 Views of animal phylogeny continue to be 
shaped by new molecular and morphological data 736
The Diversification of Animals 736
Future Directions in Animal Systematics 738
 33 Invertebrates 7 4 0
CONCEPT 33.1 Sponges are basal animals that lack  
tissues 744
CONCEPT 33.2 Cnidarians are an ancient phylum of 
eumetazoans 745
Medusozoans 746
Anthozoans 7 4 7
CONCEPT 33.3 Lophotrochozoans, a clade identified by 
molecular data, have the widest range of animal body  
forms 7 4 8
Flatworms 748
Rotifers and Acanthocephalans 7 5 1
Ectoprocts and Brachiopods 752
Molluscs 7 5 3
Annelids 7 5 7
CONCEPT 33.4 Ecdysozoans 
are the most species-rich 
animal group 759
Nematodes 7 5 9
Arthropods 760
CONCEPT 33.5 Echinoderms 
and chordates are 
deuterostomes 767
Echinoderms 7 6 7
Chordates 769
Ovules and Production of 
Eggs 692
Pollen and Production of 
Sperm 692
The Evolutionary Advantage of 
Seeds 693
CONCEPT 30.2 Gymnosperms 
bear “naked” seeds, typically on 
cones 694
The Life Cycle of a Pine 694
Early Seed Plants and the Rise of 
Gymnosperms 695
Gymnosperm Diversity 695
CONCEPT 30.3 The reproductive adaptations of angiosperms 
include flowers and fruits 698
Characteristics of Angiosperms 698
Angiosperm Evolution 7 0 1
Angiosperm Diversity 7 0 3
CONCEPT 30.4 H u m a n  w e l f a r e  d e p e n d s  o n  s e e d  p l a n t s 705
Products from Seed Plants 7 0 5
Threats to Plant Diversity 7 0 5
 31 Introduction to Fungi 7 0 8
CONCEPT 31.1 Fungi are heterotrophs that feed by 
absorption 709
Nutrition and Ecology 709
Body Structure 709
Specialized Hyphae in Mycorrhizal Fungi 7 1 0
CONCEPT 31.2 Fungi produce spores through sexual or 
asexual life cycles 711
Sexual Reproduction 7 1 2
Asexual Reproduction 7 1 2
CONCEPT 31.3 T h e  a n c e s t o r  o f  f u n g i  w a s  a n  a q u a t i c ,  s i n g l e -
celled, flagellated protist 713
The Origin of Fungi 7 1 3
The Move to Land 7 1 4
CONCEPT 31.4 Fungi have radiated into a diverse set of 
lineages 714
Cryptomycetes and Microsporidians 7 1 5
Zoopagomycetes 7 1 6
Mucoromycetes 7 1 7
Ascomycetes 7 1 7
Basidiomycetes 7 1 9
42 DETAILED CONTENTS
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   42 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 44 ===

 34 Vertebrates 7 7 2
CONCEPT 34.1 Chordates have a notochord and a dorsal, 
hollow nerve cord 773
Derived Characters of Chordates 7 7 3
Lancelets 7 7 4
Tunicates 7 7 5
Early Chordate Evolution 7 7 6
CONCEPT 34.2 Vertebrates are chordates that have a 
backbone 776
Derived Characters of Vertebrates 7 7 6
Hagfishes and Lampreys 7 7 7
Early Vertebrate Evolution 7 7 8
CONCEPT 34.3 Gnathostomes are vertebrates that have  
jaws 7 7 9
Derived Characters of Gnathostomes 779
Fossil Gnathostomes 780
Chondrichthyans (Sharks, Rays, and Their  
Relatives) 780
Ray-Finned Fishes and Lobe-Fins 782
CONCEPT 34.4 Tetrapods are gnathostomes that have  
limbs 7 8 4
Derived Characters of Tetrapods 7 8 4
The Origin of Tetrapods 785
Amphibians 785
CONCEPT 34.5 Amniotes are tetrapods that have a terrestrially 
adapted egg 788
Derived Characters of Amniotes 788
Early Amniotes 789
Reptiles 789
CONCEPT 34.6 Mammals are amniotes that have hair and 
produce milk 795
Derived Characters of Mammals 795
Early Evolution of Mammals 795
Monotremes 796
Marsupials 797
Eutherians (Placental Mammals) 798
CONCEPT 34.7 Humans are mammals that have a large brain 
and bipedal locomotion 802
Derived Characters of Humans 802
The Earliest Hominins 802
Australopiths 803
Bipedalism 804
Tool Use 804
Early Homo 804
Neanderthals 806
Homo sapiens 807
 DETAILED CONTENTS 43
Unit 6 Plants: Structure and Function 811
Interview: Dennis Gonsalves 811
35 Plant Structure and Growth 8 1 2
CONCEPT 35.1 Plants have a hierarchical organization 
consisting of organs, tissues, and cells 813
V ascular Plant Organs: Roots, Stems, and Leaves 8 1 3
Dermal, V ascular, and Ground Tissues 8 1 6
Common Types of Plant Cells 8 1 7
CONCEPT 35.2 Different meristems 
generate new cells for primary and 
secondary growth 820
CONCEPT 35.3 Primary growth 
lengthens roots and shoots 822
Primary Growth of Roots 822
Primary Growth of Shoots 823
CONCEPT 35.4 Secondary growth 
increases the diameter of stems and 
roots in woody plants 826
The V ascular Cambium and Secondary V ascular Tissue 827
The Cork Cambium and the Production of Periderm 828
Evolution of Secondary Growth 828
CONCEPT 35.5 Growth, morphogenesis, and cell 
differentiation produce the plant body 829
Model Organisms: Revolutionizing the Study of Plants 830
Growth: Cell Division and Cell Expansion 830
Morphogenesis and Pattern Formation 831
Gene Expression and the Control of Cell Differentiation 832
Shifts in Development: Phase Changes 832
Genetic Control of Flowering 833
 36 Transport in Vascular Plants 838
CONCEPT 36.1 Adaptations for acquiring resources were key 
steps in the evolution of vascular plants 839
Shoot Architecture and Light Capture 839
Root Architecture and Acquisition of Water and Minerals 8 4 1
CONCEPT 36.2 Different mechanisms transport substances 
over short or long distances 841
The Apoplast and Symplast: Transport Continuums 8 4 1
Short-Distance Transport of Solutes Across Plasma  
Membranes 842
Short-Distance Transport of Water Across Plasma Membranes 842
Long-Distance Transport: The Role of Bulk Flow 845
CONCEPT 36.3 Transpiration drives the transport of water and 
minerals from roots to shoots via the xylem 846
Absorption of Water and Minerals by Root Cells 846
Transport of Water and Minerals into the Xylem 846
Bulk Flow Transport via the Xylem 846
Xylem Sap Ascent by Bulk Flow: A Review 850
CONCEPT 36.4 The rate of transpiration is regulated by 
stomata 850
Stomata: Major Pathways for Water Loss 850
Mechanisms of Stomatal Opening and Closing 851
Stimuli for Stomatal Opening and Closing 852
Effects of Transpiration on Wilting and Leaf Temperature 852
Adaptations That Reduce Evaporative Water Loss 852
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   43 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 45 ===

 37 Plant Nutrition 8 5 9
CONCEPT 37.1 S o i l  c o n t a i n s  a  l i v i n g ,  c o m p l e x  e c o s y s t e m 860
Soil Texture 860
Topsoil Composition 860
Soil Conservation and Sustainable Agriculture 861
CONCEPT 37.2 Plant roots absorb many types of essential 
elements from the soil 863
Essential Elements 864
Symptoms of Mineral Deficiency 864
Global Climate Change and Food Quality 866
CONCEPT 37.3 Plant nutrition often involves relationships 
with other organisms 866
Bacteria and Plant Nutrition 868
Fungi and Plant Nutrition 8 7 1
Epiphytes, Parasitic Plants, and Carnivorous Plants 8 7 2
 38 Reproduction of Flowering 
Plants 8 7 6
CONCEPT 38.1 Flowers, double 
fertilization, and fruits are key features 
of the angiosperm life cycle 877
Flower Structure and Function 8 7 7
Methods of Pollination 879
The Angiosperm Life Cycle: An 
Overview 880
Development of Female Gametophytes 
(Embryo Sacs) 880
Development of Male Gametophytes in 
Pollen Grains 880
Seed Development and Structure 882
Sporophyte Development from Seed to Mature Plant 883
Fruit Structure and Function 884
CONCEPT 38.2 Flowering plants reproduce sexually, asexually, 
or both 887
Mechanisms of Asexual Reproduction 887
Advantages and Disadvantages of Asexual and Sexual 
Reproduction 887
Mechanisms That Prevent Self-Fertilization 888
Totipotency, Vegetative Reproduction, and Tissue Culture 889
CONCEPT 38.3 People modify crops by breeding and genetic 
engineering 890
Plant Breeding 891
Plant Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering 891
The Debate over Plant Biotechnology 893
 39 Plant Signals and Behavior 8 9 6
CONCEPT 39.1 Signal transduction pathways link signal 
reception to response 897
Reception 898
Transduction 898
Response 899
CONCEPT 39.2 P l a n t s  u s e  c h e m i c a l s  t o  c o m m u n i c a t e 8 9 9
General Characteristics of Plant Hormones 900
A Survey of Plant Hormones 901
CONCEPT 39.3 Responses to light are critical for plant 
success 909
Blue-Light Photoreceptors 909
Phytochrome Photoreceptors 9 1 0
Biological Clocks and Circadian Rhythms 9 1 1
The Effect of Light on the Biological Clock 9 1 2
Photoperiodism and Responses to Seasons 9 1 3
CONCEPT 39.4 Plants respond to a wide variety of stimuli 
other than light 915
Gravity 9 1 5
Mechanical Stimuli 9 1 5
Environmental Stresses 9 1 6
CONCEPT 39.5 Plants respond to attacks by pathogens and 
herbivores 920
Defenses Against Pathogens 920
Defenses Against Herbivores 921
44 DETAILED CONTENTS
CONCEPT 36.5 Sugars are transported from sources to sinks 
via the phloem 853
Movement from Sugar Sources to Sugar Sinks 853
Bulk Flow by Positive Pressure: The Mechanism of Translocation in 
Angiosperms 854
CONCEPT 36.6 T h e  s y m p l a s t  i s  h i g h l y  d y n a m i c 855
Changes in Plasmodesmatal Number and Pore Size 856
Phloem: An Information Superhighway 856
Electrical Signaling in the Phloem 856
 40 The Animal Body 9 2 7
CONCEPT 40.1 Animal form and function are correlated at all 
levels of organization 928
Evolution of Animal Size and Shape 928
Exchange with the Environment 928
Unit 7  Animals: Structure and Function 926
Interview: Steffanie Strathdee 926
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   44 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 46 ===

CONCEPT 42.3 Organs specialized for sequential stages of 
food processing form the mammalian digestive system 981
The Oral Cavity, Pharynx, and Esophagus 981
Digestion in the Stomach 983
Digestion in the Small Intestine 984
Absorption in the Small Intestine 985
Processing in the Large Intestine 986
CONCEPT 42.4 Evolutionary adaptations of vertebrate 
digestive systems correlate with diet 987
Dental Adaptations 987
Stomach and Intestinal Adaptations 988
Mutualistic Adaptations 988
CONCEPT 42.5 Feedback circuits regulate digestion,  
energy storage, and appetite 991
Regulation of Digestion 991
Regulation of Energy Storage 991
Regulation of Appetite and Consumption 993
 43 Animal Transport Systems 9 9 7
CONCEPT 43.1 Circulatory systems link exchange surfaces 
with cells throughout the body 998
Gastrovascular Cavities 998
Open and Closed Circulatory Systems 999
Organization of Vertebrate Circulatory  
Systems 1 0 0 0
CONCEPT 43.2 Coordinated cycles of heart contraction drive 
double circulation in mammals 1002
Mammalian Circulation 1 0 0 2
The Mammalian Heart: A Closer Look 1 0 0 2
Maintaining the Heart’s Rhythmic Beat 1004
CONCEPT 43.3 Patterns of blood pressure and flow reflect the 
structure and arrangement of blood vessels 1005
Blood Vessel Structure and Function 1 0 0 5
Blood Flow Velocity 1006
Blood Pressure 1006
Capillary Function 1008
Fluid Return by the Lymphatic System 1009
CONCEPT 43.4 Blood components function in exchange, 
transport, and defense 1010
Blood Composition and Function 1 0 1 0
Cardiovascular Disease 1 0 1 3
CONCEPT 43.5 Gas exchange occurs across specialized 
respiratory surfaces 1015
Partial Pressure Gradients in Gas Exchange 1 0 1 5
Respiratory Media 1 0 1 5
Respiratory Surfaces 1 0 1 6
Gills in Aquatic Animals 1 0 1 6
Tracheal Systems in Insects 1 0 1 7
Lungs 1 0 1 8
CONCEPT 43.6 Breathing ventilates the lungs 1020
How an Amphibian Breathes 1 0 2 0
How a Bird Breathes 1 0 2 0
How a Mammal Breathes 1 0 2 1
Control of Breathing in Humans 1022
CONCEPT 43.7 Adaptations for gas exchange include 
pigments that bind and transport gases 1023
Coordination of Circulation and Gas Exchange 1023
Respiratory Pigments 1023
Respiratory Adaptations of Diving Mammals 1025
 DETAILED CONTENTS 45
Hierarchical Organization of Body Plans 930
Coordination and Control 934
CONCEPT 40.2 Feedback control maintains the internal 
environment in many animals 935
Regulating and Conforming 935
Homeostasis 935
CONCEPT 40.3 Homeostatic processes for thermoregulation 
involve form, function, and behavior 938
Endothermy and Ectothermy 938
V ariation in Body Temperature 938
Balancing Heat Loss and Gain 939
Acclimatization in Thermoregulation 942
Physiological Thermostats and Fever 942
CONCEPT 40.4 Energy requirements are related to animal 
size, activity, and environment 943
Energy Allocation and Use 943
Quantifying Energy Use 9 4 4
Minimum Metabolic Rate and Thermoregulation 9 4 4
Influences on Metabolic Rate 945
Torpor and Energy Conservation 946
 41 Chemical Signals in Animals 9 5 3
CONCEPT 41.1 Hormones and other signaling molecules bind 
to target receptors, triggering specific response  
pathways 954
Intercellular Information Flow 954
Chemical Classes of Hormones 955
Cellular Hormone Response Pathways 956
Endocrine Tissues and Organs 957
CONCEPT 41.2 Feedback regulation and coordination with the 
nervous system are common in hormone  
pathways 958
Simple Endocrine Pathways 958
Simple Neuroendocrine Pathways 959
Feedback Regulation 959
Coordination of the Endocrine and Nervous Systems 960
Thyroid Regulation: A Hormone Cascade Pathway 962
Hormonal Regulation of Growth 963
CONCEPT 41.3 Endocrine glands respond to diverse stimuli 
in regulating homeostasis, development, and  
behavior 9 6 5
Parathyroid Hormone and Vitamin D: Control of Blood 
Calcium 965
Adrenal Hormones: Response to Stress 966
Sex Hormones 968
Hormones and Biological Rhythms 969
Evolution of Hormone Function 969
 42 Animal Digestive Systems 9 7 4
CONCEPT 42.1 An animal’s diet must supply chemical energy, 
organic building blocks, and essential nutrients 975
Essential Nutrients 9 7 5
V ariation in Diet 9 7 7
Dietary Deficiencies 9 7 7
Assessing Nutritional Needs 9 7 8
CONCEPT 42.2 Food processing involves ingestion, digestion, 
absorption, and elimination 978
Digestive Compartments 980
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   45 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 47 ===

 44 Animal Excretory Systems 1 0 2 9
CONCEPT 44.1 Osmoregulation balances the uptake and loss 
of water and solutes 1030
Osmosis and Osmolarity 1030
Osmoregulatory Challenges and Mechanisms 1030
Energetics of Osmoregulation 1032
Transport Epithelia in Osmoregulation 1033
CONCEPT 44.2 An animal’s nitrogenous wastes reflect its 
phylogeny and habitat 1034
Forms of Nitrogenous Waste 1 0 3 4
The Influence of Evolution and Environment on Nitrogenous 
Wastes 1035
CONCEPT 44.3 Diverse excretory systems are variations on a 
tubular theme 1035
Survey of Excretory Systems 1036
CONCEPT 44.4 The nephron is organized for stepwise 
processing of blood filtrate 1039
From Blood Filtrate to Urine: A Closer Look 1039
Solute Gradients and Water Conservation 1041
Adaptations of the Vertebrate Kidney to Diverse Environments 1 0 4 3
CONCEPT 44.5 Hormonal circuits link kidney function, water 
balance, and blood pressure 1046
Homeostatic Regulation of the Kidney 1046
 45 Animal Reproductive Systems 1 0 5 1
CONCEPT 45.1 Both asexual and sexual reproduction occur in 
the animal kingdom 1052
Mechanisms of Asexual Reproduction 1052
V ariation in Patterns of Sexual Reproduction 1052
Reproductive Cycles 1 0 5 3
Sexual Reproduction: An Evolutionary Enigma 1 0 5 3
CONCEPT 45.2 Fertilization depends on mechanisms that 
bring together sperm and eggs of the same species 1054
Ensuring the Survival of Offspring 1055
Gamete Production and Delivery 1055
CONCEPT 45.3 Reproductive organs produce and transport 
gametes 1057
Human Male Reproductive Anatomy 1 0 5 7
Human Female Reproductive Anatomy 1058
Gametogenesis 1 0 5 9
CONCEPT 45.4 The interplay of tropic and sex hormones 
regulates reproduction in mammals 1062
Biological Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation in Human 
Sexuality 1063
Hormonal Control of the Male Reproductive System 1063
Hormonal Control of Female Reproductive Cycles 1064
Human Sexual Response 1066
CONCEPT 45.5 In placental mammals, an embryo develops 
fully within the mother’s uterus 1066
Conception, Embryonic Development, and Birth 1066
Maternal Immune Tolerance of the Embryo and Fetus 1069
Contraception and Abortion 1069
Modern Reproductive Technologies 1 0 7 1
 46 Development in Animals 1 0 7 5
CONCEPT 46.1 Fertilization and cleavage initiate embryonic 
development 1076
Fertilization 1 0 7 6
Cleavage 1 0 7 8
CONCEPT 46.2 Morphogenesis in animals involves specific 
changes in cell shape, position, and survival 1081
Gastrulation 1081
Developmental Adaptations of Amniotes 1085
Organogenesis 1086
The Cytoskeleton in Morphogenesis 1088
CONCEPT 46.3 Cytoplasmic determinants and inductive 
signals regulate cell fate 1089
Fate Mapping 1090
Axis Formation 1091
Restricting Developmental Potential 1092
Cell Fate Determination and Pattern Formation by  
Inductive Signals 1093
Cilia and Cell Fate 1096
 47 Animal Defenses Against 
Infection 1 1 0 0
CONCEPT 47.1 In innate immunity, recognition and response 
rely on traits common to groups of pathogens 1101
Innate Immunity of Invertebrates 1 1 0 1
Innate Immunity of Vertebrates 1 1 0 2
Evasion of Innate Immunity by Pathogens 1 1 0 5
46 DETAILED CONTENTS
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   46 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 48 ===

CONCEPT 49.2 The vertebrate brain is regionally 
specialized 1 1 4 9
Arousal and Sleep 1 152
Biological Clock Regulation 1 152
Emotions 1 1 5 3
Functional Imaging of the Brain 1 1 5 4
CONCEPT 49.3 The cerebral cortex controls voluntary 
movement and cognitive functions 1154
Information Processing 1 155
Language and Speech 1 156
Lateralization of Cortical Function 1 156
Frontal Lobe Function 1 156
Evolution of Cognition in Vertebrates 1 156
CONCEPT 49.4 Changes in synaptic connections underlie 
memory and learning 1157
Neuronal Plasticity 1 158
Memory and Learning 1 158
Long-Term Potentiation 1 1 5 9
CONCEPT 49.5 Many nervous system disorders can now be 
explained in molecular terms 1160
Schizophrenia 1 160
Depression 1 160
The Brain’s Reward System and Drug Addiction 1 1 6 1
Alzheimer’s Disease 1 1 6 1
Parkinson’s Disease 1 162
Future Directions in Brain Research 1 162
 50 Sensation and Movement  
in Animals 1 1 6 5
CONCEPT 50.1 Sensory receptors transduce stimulus  
energy and transmit signals to the central nervous  
system 1166
Sensory Reception and Transduction 1 166
Transmission 1 1 6 7
Perception 1 1 6 7
Amplification and Adaptation 1 1 6 7
Types of Sensory Receptors 1 168
CONCEPT 50.2 In hearing and equilibrium, mechanoreceptors 
detect moving fluid or settling particles 1170
Sensing of Gravity and Sound in Invertebrates 1 1 7 0
Hearing and Equilibrium in Mammals 1 1 7 0
Hearing and Equilibrium in Other Vertebrates 1 1 7 4
CONCEPT 50.3 The diverse visual receptors of animals depend 
on light-absorbing pigments 1175
Evolution of Visual Perception 1 1 7 5
The Vertebrate Visual System 1 1 7 7
CONCEPT 50.4 The senses of taste and smell rely on similar 
sets of sensory receptors 1181
Taste in Mammals 1 1 8 1
Smell in Humans 1 182
CONCEPT 50.5 The physical interaction of protein filaments is 
required for muscle function 1183
Vertebrate Skeletal Muscle 1 1 8 4
Other Types of Muscle 1 189
CONCEPT 50.6 Skeletal systems transform muscle contraction 
into locomotion 1190
Types of Skeletal Systems 1 190
Types of Locomotion 1 193
CONCEPT 47.2 In adaptive immunity, receptors provide 
pathogen-specific recognition 1105
Antigens as the Trigger for Adaptive Immunity 1 106
Antigen Recognition by B Cells and Antibodies 1 106
Antigen Recognition by T Cells 1 1 0 7
B Cell and T Cell Development 1 108
CONCEPT 47.3 Adaptive immunity defends against infection 
of body fluids and body cells 1111
Helper T Cells: Activating Adaptive Immunity 1 1 1 1
B Cells and Antibodies: A Response to Extracellular  
Pathogens 1 1 1 2
Cytotoxic T Cells: A Response to Infected Host Cells 1 1 1 4
Summary of the Humoral and Cell-Mediated Immune 
Responses 1 1 1 5
Immunization 1 1 1 6
Active and Passive Immunity 1 1 1 6
Antibodies as Tools 1 1 1 7
Immune Rejection 1 1 1 7
CONCEPT 47.4 Disruptions in immune system function can 
elicit or exacerbate disease 1118
Exaggerated, Self-Directed, and Diminished Immune 
Responses 1 1 1 8
Evolutionary Adaptations of Pathogens That Underlie Immune 
System Avoidance 1 1 1 9
Cancer and Immunity 1 122
 48 Electrical Signals  
in Animals 1 1 2 5
CONCEPT 48.1 Neuron structure and organization reflect 
function in information transfer 1126
Neuron Structure and Function 1 126
Introduction to Information Processing 1 126
CONCEPT 48.2 Ion pumps and ion channels establish the 
resting potential of a neuron 1127
Formation of the Resting Potential 1 128
Modeling the Resting Potential 1 129
CONCEPT 48.3 Action potentials are the signals conducted by 
axons 1130
Hyperpolarization and Depolarization 1 130
Graded Potentials and Action Potentials 1 1 3 1
Generation of Action Potentials: A Closer Look 1 1 3 1
Conduction of Action Potentials 1 133
CONCEPT 48.4 Neurons communicate with other cells at 
synapses 1135
Generation of Postsynaptic Potentials 1 136
Summation of Postsynaptic Potentials 1 1 3 7
Termination of Neurotransmitter Signaling 1 1 3 7
Modulated Signaling at Synapses 1 138
Neurotransmitters 1 138
 49 Neural Regulation  
in Animals 1 1 4 3
CONCEPT 49.1 Nervous systems consist of circuits of neurons 
and supporting cells 1144
Organization of the Vertebrate Nervous System 1 145
The Peripheral Nervous System 1 146
Glia 1 148
 DETAILED CONTENTS 47
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   47 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 49 ===

 51 An Overview of Ecology 1 1 9 8
CONCEPT 51.1 Earth’s climate varies by latitude and season 
and is changing rapidly 1201
Global Climate Patterns 1 2 0 1
Regional and Local Effects on Climate 1 2 0 1
Effects of Vegetation on Climate 1 2 0 3
Microclimate 1 2 0 3
Global Climate Change 1204
CONCEPT 51.2 The distribution of terrestrial biomes is 
controlled by climate and disturbance 1205
Climate and Terrestrial Biomes 1 2 0 5
General Features of Terrestrial Biomes 1206
Disturbance and Terrestrial Biomes 1206
CONCEPT 51.3 Aquatic biomes are diverse and dynamic 
systems that cover most of Earth 1211
Zonation in Aquatic Biomes 1 2 1 1
CONCEPT 51.4 Interactions between organisms  
and the environment limit the distribution of  
species 1212
Dispersal and Distribution 1 2 1 7
Biotic Factors 1 2 1 8
Abiotic Factors 1 2 1 8
CONCEPT 51.5 Ecological change and evolution  
affect one another over long and short periods of  
time 1221
 52 Behavioral Ecology 1 2 2 5
CONCEPT 52.1 Discrete sensory inputs can stimulate both 
simple and complex behaviors 1226
Fixed Action Patterns 1226
Migration 1226
Behavioral Rhythms 1227
Animal Signals and Communication 1227
CONCEPT 52.2 Learning establishes specific links between 
experience and behavior 1229
Experience and Behavior 1229
Learning 1230
CONCEPT 52.3 Selection for individual survival  
and reproductive success can explain diverse  
behaviors 1234
Evolution of Foraging Behavior 1234
Mating Behavior and Mate Choice 1235
CONCEPT 52.4 Genetic analyses and the concept of inclusive 
fitness provide a basis for studying the evolution  
of behavior 1 2 4 0
Genetic Basis of Behavior 1 2 4 1
Genetic V ariation and the Evolution of  
Behavior 1 2 4 1
Altruism 1242
Inclusive Fitness 1243
Evolution and Human Culture 1245
Unit 8 The Ecology of Life 1197
48 DETAILED CONTENTS
 53 Populations and Life History 
Traits 1 2 4 8
CONCEPT 53.1 Biotic and abiotic factors affect population 
density, dispersion, and demographics 1249
Density and Dispersion 1249
Demographics 1251
CONCEPT 53.2 The exponential model describes 
population growth in an idealized, unlimited 
environment 1 2 5 4
Changes in Population Size 1254
Exponential Growth 1254
CONCEPT 53.3 The logistic model describes how a  
population grows more slowly as it nears its carrying 
capacity 1255
The Logistic Growth Model 1256
The Logistic Model and Real Populations 1257
CONCEPT 53.4 Life history traits are products of natural 
selection 1258
Diversity of Life Histories 1258
“Trade-offs” and Life Histories 1259
CONCEPT 53.5 Density-dependent factors regulate 
population growth 1260
Population Change and Population Density 1260
Mechanisms of Density-Dependent  
Population Regulation 1261
Population Dynamics 1263
CONCEPT 53.6 The human population 
is no longer growing exponentially but 
is still increasing extremely rapidly 1 2 6 5
The Global Human Population 1265
Global Carrying Capacity 1267
 54 Biodiversity and Communities 1 2 7 2
CONCEPT 54.1 Interactions between species can help, harm, 
or have no effect on the individuals involved 1273
Competition 1 2 7 3
Exploitation 1 2 7 5
Positive Interactions 1 2 7 8
CONCEPT 54.2 Diversity and trophic structure characterize 
biological communities 1280
Species Diversity 1280
Diversity and Community Stability 1281
Trophic Structure 1281
Species with a Large Impact 1283
Bottom-Up and Top-Down Controls 1284
CONCEPT 54.3 Disturbance influences species diversity and 
composition 1286
Characterizing Disturbance 1286
Ecological Succession 1287
Human Disturbance 1289
CONCEPT 54.4 Biogeographic factors affect community 
diversity 1289
Latitudinal Gradients 1290
Area Effects 1290
Island Equilibrium Model 1290
Interview: Chelsea Rochman 1197
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   48 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 50 ===

CONCEPT 54.5 Pathogens alter community structure locally 
and globally 1292
Effects on Community Structure 1292
Community Ecology and Zoonotic Diseases 1292
 55 Energy Flow and Chemical Cycling 
in Ecosystems 1 2 9 6
CONCEPT 55.1 Physical laws govern energy flow and chemical 
cycling in ecosystems 1297
Energy Flow and Chemical Cycling 1297
Conservation of Energy 1297
Conservation of Mass 1297
Energy, Mass, and Trophic Levels 1298
CONCEPT 55.2 Energy and other limiting factors control 
primary production in ecosystems 1299
Ecosystem Energy Budgets 1299
Primary Production in Aquatic Ecosystems 1300
Primary Production in Terrestrial Ecosystems 1301
Effects of Climate Change on Production   1302
CONCEPT 55.3 Energy transfer between trophic levels is 
typically only 10% efficient 1304
Production Efficiency 1304
Trophic Efficiency and Ecological Pyramids 1304
CONCEPT 55.4 Biological and geochemical processes cycle 
nutrients and water in ecosystems 1306
Decomposition and Nutrient Cycling Rates 1306
Biogeochemical Cycles 1307
Case Study: Nutrient Cycling in the Hubbard Brook Experimental 
Forest 1 3 1 0
CONCEPT 55.5 Restoration ecologists return degraded 
ecosystems to a more natural state 1311
Bioremediation 1 3 1 1
Biological Augmentation 1 3 1 3
Ecosystems: A Review 1 3 1 3
 56 Conservation and Global 
Ecology 1 3 1 8
CONCEPT 56.1 Human activities threaten earth’s  
biodiversity 1 3 1 9
Three Levels of Biodiversity 1 3 1 9
Biodiversity and Human Welfare 1320
Threats to Biodiversity 1321
Can Extinct Species Be Resurrected? 1324
CONCEPT 56.2 Population conservation focuses  
on population size, genetic diversity, and critical  
habitat 1324
Extinction Risks in Small Populations 1324
Critical Habitat 1327
Weighing Conflicting Demands 1328
CONCEPT 56.3 Landscape and regional conservation help 
sustain biodiversity 1328
Landscape Structure and Biodiversity 1328
Establishing Protected Areas 1330
Urban Ecology 1331
CONCEPT 56.4 Earth is changing rapidly as a result of human 
actions 1332
Nutrient Enrichment 1332
Toxins in the Environment 1333
Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change 1336
Depletion of Atmospheric Ozone 1 3 4 1
CONCEPT 56.5 Sustainable development can improve human 
lives while conserving biodiversity 1342
Sustainable Development 1342
The Future of the Biosphere 1343
APPENDIX A Answers A-1
APPENDIX B Classification of Life B-1
APPENDIX C  A Comparison of the Light Microscope and the 
Electron Microscope C-1
APPENDIX D Scientific Skills Review D-1
CREDITS CR!1
GLOSSARY G!1
INDEX I!1
 
 
 DETAILED CONTENTS 49
A01_URRY1637_12_GE_FM_PRF.indd   49 26/03/20   12:11 PM

=== SIDE 51 ===

Biology and Its Themes1
Figure 1.1 The light, dappled color of this beach mouse (Peromyscus polionotus) 
allows it to blend into its habitat—brilliant white sand dunes dotted with sparse 
clumps of beach grass along the Florida seashore. Mice of the same species that 
inhabit nearby inland areas are much darker, blending with the soil and vegetation 
where they live.
How do these mice illustrate the unifying themes of biology?
As a result of evolution 
through natural selection 
over long periods of time, 
the fur colors of these 
two populations of mice 
resemble their surround-
ings, providing protection 
from predators.
Structure fits function 
at all levels of a mouse’s 
organization.
Genetic information encoded in 
DNA determines a mouse’s fur colors.
Energy flows 
one way from the 
sun to plants to a 
mouse; matter 
cycles between a 
mouse and its 
environment.
A plant being 
eaten by a 
mouse and a 
mouse being 
preyed upon by 
a hawk are 
interactions 
within a system.
Organ
(heart) Tissue
Beach
mouse
Inland
mouse
Cell Molecule
Flow of energy
Cycling of
matter
Gene for brown fur
Gene for white fur
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 1
• Figure 1.8 Walkthrough: Gene  
Expression: Cells Use Information  
Encoded in a Gene to Synthesize a 
Functional Protein
• Video: Galápagos Biodiversity by Peter 
and Rosemary Grant
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Interpreting a  
Pair of Bar Graphs
• Tutorial: The Scientific Method
Study Tip
Make a table: List the five unifying 
themes of biology across the top. Enter at 
least three examples of each theme as you 
read this chapter. One example is filled 
in for you. To help you focus on these 
big ideas, continue adding examples 
throughout your study of biology.
1.1  The study of life reveals unifying 
themes p. 51
1.2  The Core Theme: Evolution accounts 
for the unity and diversity of life p. 59
1.3  In studying nature, scientists form 
and test hypotheses p. 64
1.4  Science benefits from a cooperative 
approach and diverse viewpoints p. 70
KEY CONCEPTS
Evolution Organization
Beach
mouse’s
coat color
matches
its sandy
habitat.
50
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   50 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 52 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 51
made every day. How can you organize into a comprehen-
sible framework all the information you’ll encounter as you 
study biology? Focusing on a few big ideas will help. Here are 
five unifying themes—ways of thinking about life that will 
still be useful decades from now.
• Organization
• Information
• Energy and Matter
• Interactions
• Evolution
In this section and the next, we’ll briefly explore each theme.
The study of life reveals  
unifying themes
At the most fundamental level, we may ask: What is life? Even a 
child realizes that a dog or a plant is alive, while a rock or a car is 
not. Yet the phenomenon we call life defies a simple definition. 
We recognize life by what living things do. Figure!1.2 highlights 
some of the properties and processes we!associate with life.
Biology, the scientific study of life, is a subject of enor-
mous scope, and exciting new biological discoveries are being 
m  Regulation. The regulation of blood 
flow through the blood vessels of this 
jackrabbit’s ears helps maintain a 
constant body temperature by 
adjusting heat exchange with the 
surrounding air.
. Reproduction. 
Organisms (living 
things) reproduce 
their own kind.
m Growth and development. 
Inherited information carried by 
genes controls the pattern of 
growth and development of organ- 
isms, such as this oak seedling.
. Order. This close-up of a sunflower 
illustrates the highly ordered 
structure that characterizes life.
m  Energy processing. This 
butterfly obtains fuel in 
the form of nectar from 
flowers. The butterfly    
will use chemical energy 
stored in its food to 
power flight and other 
work.
m  Evolutionary adaptation. The overall 
appearance of this pygmy sea horse 
camouflages the animal in its environment. 
Such adaptations evolve over countless 
generations by the reproductive          
success of those individuals with  
heritable traits that are best suited to 
their environments.
m Response to the 
environment.     
The Venus flytrap   
on the left closed    
its trap rapidly in 
response to the 
environmental 
stimulus of a 
grasshopper   
landing on the   
open trap.
. Figure 1.2 Some properties of life.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Signs of Life  
Video: Sea Horse Camouflage
CONCEPT 1.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   51 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 53 ===

52 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
complex systems to simpler components that are more man-
ageable to study. Reductionism is a powerful strategy in biol-
ogy. For example, by studying the molecular structure of DNA 
that had been extracted from cells, James Watson and Francis 
Crick inferred the chemical basis of biological inheritance. 
Despite its importance, reductionism provides an incomplete 
view of life on Earth, as you’ll see next.
Emergent Properties
Let’s reexamine Figure 1.3, beginning this time at the molec-
ular level and then zooming out. This approach allows us 
to see novel properties emerge at each level that are absent 
Theme: New Properties Emerge at 
Successive Levels of Biological Organization
ORGANIZATION  The study of life on Earth extends from 
the microscopic scale of the molecules and cells that make up 
organisms to the global scale of the entire living planet. As 
biologists, we can divide this enormous range into different 
levels of biological organization. In Figure!1.3, we!zoom in 
from space to take a closer and closer look at life in a moun-
tain meadow. This journey, depicted as!a series of numbered 
steps, highlights the hierarchy of  biological organization.
Zooming in at ever-finer resolution illustrates the prin-
ciple that underlies reductionism, an approach that reduces 
Even from space, we can see signs of Earth’s life—in the mosaic of greens indicating forests, for
example. We can also see the biosphere, which consists of all life on Earth and all the places 
where life exists: most regions of land, most bodies of water, the atmosphere to an altitude of 
several kilometers, and even sediments far below the ocean floor.     
Our first scale change brings us to a North American mountain 
meadow, which is an example of an ecosystem, as are a tropical 
forest, grassland, desert, and coral reef. An ecosystem consists of 
all the living things in a particular area, along with all the 
nonliving components of the environment with which life 
interacts, such as soil, water, atmospheric gases, and light.     
The array of organisms inhabiting a particular 
ecosystem is called a biological community. The 
community in our meadow ecosystem includes 
many kinds of plants, various animals, mushrooms 
and other fungi, and enormous numbers of diverse 
microorganisms, such as bacteria, that are too small 
to see without a microscope. Each of these forms of 
life belongs to a species—a group whose members can 
only reproduce with other members of the group.             
b 1  The Biosphere
b 2  Ecosystems
c 3  Communities
A population consists of all the 
individuals of a species living within the 
bounds of a specified area that interbreed 
with each other. For example, our meadow 
includes a population of lupines (some of 
which are shown here) and a population of 
mule deer. A community is therefore the set 
of populations that inhabit a particular area.    
c 4  Populations
Individual living things 
are called organisms. 
Each plant in the 
meadow is an organism, 
and so is each animal, 
fungus, and bacterium.
m 5  Organisms
. Figure 1.3 Exploring Levels of Biological Organization
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   52 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 54 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 53
arranged in a certain way, you can pedal to your chosen 
destination. Compared with such nonliving examples, 
however, biological systems are far more complex, mak-
ing!the emergent properties of life especially challenging 
to!study.
To fully explore emergent properties, biologists today com-
plement reductionism with systems biology, the explo-
ration of a biological system by analyzing the  interactions 
among its parts. In this context, a single leaf cell can be 
considered a system, as can a frog, an ant colony, or a desert 
ecosystem. By examining and modeling the dynamic behav-
ior of an integrated network of components, systems biology 
enables us to pose new kinds of questions. For  example, how 
from the preceding one. These emergent properties 
are due to the arrangement and interactions of parts as 
complexity increases. For example, although photosyn-
thesis occurs in an intact chloroplast, it will not take place 
if chlorophyll and other chloroplast molecules are simply 
mixed in a test tube. The coordinated processes of photo-
synthesis require a specific organization of these molecules 
in the chloroplast. Isolated components of living systems—
the!objects of study in a reductionist approach—lack a 
number of significant properties that emerge at higher levels 
of!organization.
Emergent properties are not unique to life. A box of 
bicycle parts won’t transport you anywhere, but if they are 
The structural hierarchy of life continues to 
unfold as we explore the architecture of a 
complex organism. This lupine leaf (consisting of 
six leaflets) is an example of an organ, a body 
part that is made up of multiple tissues and has 
specific functions in the body. Leaves, stems, and 
roots are the major organs of 
plants. Within an organ, 
each tissue has a distinct 
arrangement and contrib-
utes particular properties 
to organ function.
. 6  Organs
The cell is life’s 
fundamental unit 
of structure and 
function. Some 
organisms consist 
of a single cell, 
which performs 
all the functions 
of life. Other 
organisms are multicellular and 
feature a division of labor among 
specialized cells. Here we see a magni-
fied view of a cell in a leaf tissue. 
This cell is about 40 micrometers (μm) 
across—about 500 of them would reach 
across a small coin. Within these tiny 
cells are even smaller green structures 
called chloroplasts, which are responsi-
ble for photosynthesis.
c 8  Cells
Chloroplasts are examples 
of organelles, the various 
functional components 
present in cells. The image 
below, taken by a powerful 
microscope, shows a 
single chloroplast.
. 9  Organelles
Our last scale change drops us into a chloro-
plast for a view of life at the  molecular 
level. A molecule is a chemical structure 
consisting of two or more units called atoms, 
represented as balls in this computer graphic 
of a chlorophyll molecule. Chlorophyll is 
the pigment that 
makes a leaf green, 
and it absorbs sun-
light during photo-
synthesis. Within 
each chloroplast, 
millions of chlorophyll 
molecules are 
organized into 
systems that convert 
light energy to the 
chemical energy 
of food.
. 10  Molecules
Viewing the tissues of a leaf requires a microscope. Each tissue is a group of 
cells that work together, performing a specialized function. The leaf shown 
here has been cut on an angle. The honeycombed tissue in the interior of 
the leaf (left side of photo) is the main 
location of photosynthesis, the process 
that converts light energy to the 
chemical energy of sugar. The jigsaw 
puzzle–like “skin” on the surface of the 
leaf (right side of photo) is a tissue 
called epidermis. The pores through the 
epidermis allow entry of the gas CO2, a 
raw material for sugar production.
. 7  Tissues
50 om10 omCell
Chloroplast
Atoms
Chlorophyll
molecule1 om
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   53 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 55 ===

54 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
many scientists. The theory states that all living organisms 
are made of cells, which are the basic unit of life. In fact, the 
actions of organisms are all based on the activities of cells. For 
instance, the movement of your eyes as you read this sentence 
results from the activities of muscle and nerve cells. Even a 
process that occurs on a global scale, such as the recycling of 
carbon atoms, is the product of cellular functions, including 
the photosynthetic activity of chloroplasts in leaf cells.
All cells share certain characteristics. For instance, 
every cell is enclosed by a membrane that regulates the 
passage of materials between the cell and its surround-
ings. Nevertheless, we distinguish two main forms of cells: 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Prokaryotic cells are found 
in two groups of single-celled microorganisms, bacteria 
(singular, bacterium) and archaea (singular, archaean). All 
other forms of life, including plants and animals, are com-
posed of eukaryotic cells.
A eukaryotic cell contains membrane-enclosed organelles 
(Figure 1.4). Some organelles, such as the DNA-containing 
nucleus, are found in the cells of all eukaryotes; other organ-
elles are specific to particular cell types. For example, the chlo-
roplast in Figure 1.3 is an organelle found only in eukaryotic 
cells that carry out photosynthesis. In contrast to eukaryotic 
cells, a prokaryotic cell lacks a nucleus or other membrane-
enclosed organelles. Furthermore, prokaryotic cells are gener-
ally smaller than eukaryotic cells, as shown in!Figure 1.4.
Theme: Life’s Processes Involve  
the Expression and Transmission  
of Genetic Information
INFORMATION  Within cells, structures called chromo-
somes contain genetic material in the form of DNA 
 (deoxyribonucleic acid). In cells that are preparing to 
do networks of molecular interactions in our bodies generate 
our 24-hour cycle of wakefulness and sleep?!At a larger scale, 
how does a gradual increase in  atmospheric carbon dioxide 
alter ecosystems and the entire!biosphere? Systems biology 
can be used to study life at!all levels.
Structure and Function
At each level of the biological hierarchy, we find a correla-
tion between structure and function. Consider the leaf in 
Figure!1.3: Its broad, flat shape maximizes the capture of 
sunlight by chloroplasts. Because such correlations of struc-
ture and function are common in all living things, analyz-
ing a biological structure gives us clues about what it does 
and how it works. For example, the hummingbird’s anat-
omy allows its wings to rotate at the shoulder, so humming-
birds have the ability, unique among birds, to fly backward 
or hover in place. While 
hovering, the birds 
can extend their long, 
slender beaks into flow-
ers and feed on nectar. 
The elegant match of 
form and function in 
the structures of life is 
explained by natural 
selection, which we’ll 
explore shortly.
The Cell: An Organism’s Basic Unit  
of Structure and Function
The cell is the smallest unit of organization that can perform 
all activities required for life. The so-called Cell Theory was 
first developed in the 1800s, based on the observations of 
Eukaryotic cell Prokaryotic cell
Membrane DNA
(no nucleus)
Membrane
Membrane-
enclosed
organelles
DNA (throughout
nucleus)
Nucleus
(membrane-
enclosed)
Cytoplasm
1 om
b Figure 1.4 Contrasting eukaryotic 
and prokaryotic cells in size and 
complexity. The cells are shown to 
scale here; to see a larger magnification 
of a prokaryotic cell, see Figure 7.5.
VISUAL SKILLS Measure the scale bar, 
the length of the prokaryotic cell, and the 
diameter of the eukaryotic cell. Knowing 
that this scale bar represents 1 !m, calculate 
the length of the prokaryotic cell and the 
diameter of the eukaryotic cell in !m.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   54 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 56 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 55
divide, the chromosomes may be made visible using a dye 
that appears blue when bound to the DNA (Figure 1.5).
DNA, the Genetic Material
Each chromosome contains one very long DNA molecule 
with hundreds or thousands of genes, each a section of the 
DNA of the chromosome. Transmitted from parents to off-
spring, genes are the units of inheritance. They encode the 
information necessary to build all of the molecules synthe-
sized within a cell, which in turn establish that cell’s identity 
and function. You began as a single cell stocked with DNA 
inherited from your parents. The replication of that DNA 
prior to each cell division transmitted copies of the DNA to 
what eventually became the trillions of cells of!your body. As 
the cells grew and divided, the genetic information encoded 
by the DNA directed your development (Figure 1.6).
The molecular structure of DNA accounts for its ability to 
store information. A DNA molecule is made up of two long 
chains, called strands, arranged in a double helix. Each chain 
is made up of four kinds of chemical building blocks called 
nucleotides, abbreviated A, T, C, and G (Figure 1.7). Specific 
sequences of these four nucleotides encode the information 
in genes. The way DNA encodes information is analogous to 
how we arrange the letters of!the alphabet into words and 
phrases with specific  meanings. The word rat, for example, 
evokes a rodent; the words tar and art, which contain the 
same letters, mean very different things. We can think of 
nucleotides as a  four-letter alphabet.
For many genes, the sequence provides the blueprint for 
making a protein. For instance, a given bacterial gene may 
specify a particular protein (such as an enzyme) required  
to break down a certain sugar molecule, while one particu-
lar human gene may denote an enzyme, and another gene a 
different protein (an antibody, perhaps) that helps fight off 
infection. Overall, proteins are major players in building 
and maintaining the cell and carrying out its!activities.
10 om
. Figure 1.5 A lung cell from a newt divides into two smaller 
cells that will grow and divide again.
Egg 
cell
Sperm cell
Nuclei containing DNA
Fertilized egg
with DNA from
both parents Embryo’s cells
with copies of
inherited DNA
Offspring with 
traits inherited 
from both parents
. Figure 1.6 Inherited DNA 
directs the development of 
an organism.
(a)
A
A
T
A
T
A
T
A
T
C
C
C
G
G
DNA double helix. This
model shows the atoms
in a segment of DNA. Made
up of two long chains (strands) 
of building blocks called
nucleotides, a DNA molecule
takes the three-dimensional
form of a double helix.
Single strand of DNA. These
geometric shapes and letters are
simple symbols for the nucleo-
tides in a small section of one
strand of a DNA molecule. Genetic
information is encoded in specific
sequences of the four types of
nucleotides. Their names are 
abbreviated A, T, C, and G. 
(b)
Nucleotide
Nucleus
Cell
DNA
. Figure 1.7 DNA: the genetic 
material.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Heritable Information: DNA
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   55 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 57 ===

56 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
Protein-encoding genes control protein production indi-
rectly, using a related molecule called RNA as an intermedi-
ary. The sequence of nucleotides along a gene is transcribed 
into mRNA, which is then translated into a linked series of 
protein building blocks called amino acids. Once completed, 
the amino acid chain forms a specific protein with a unique 
shape and function. The entire process by which the informa-
tion in a gene directs the manufacture of a cellular product is 
called gene expression (Figure 1.8).
In carrying out gene expression, all forms of life employ 
essentially the same genetic code: A particular sequence of 
nucleotides means the same thing in one organism as it does 
in another. Differences between organisms reflect differences 
between their nucleotide sequences rather than between 
their genetic codes. This universality of the genetic code is 
a strong piece of evidence that all life is related. Comparing 
the!sequences in several species for a gene that codes for a 
 particular protein can provide valuable information both 
about the protein and about the relationship of the species 
to!each other.
Molecules of mRNA, like the one in Figure 1.8, are trans-
lated into proteins, but other cellular RNAs function differ-
ently. For example, we have known for decades that some 
types of RNA are actually components of the cellular machin-
ery that manufactures proteins. In the last few decades, scien-
tists have discovered new classes of RNA that play other roles 
in the cell, such as regulating the function of protein-coding 
genes. Genes specify these RNAs as well, and their production 
is also referred to as gene expression. By carrying the instruc-
tions for making proteins and RNAs and by replicating with 
each cell division, DNA ensures faithful inheritance of genetic 
information from generation to generation.
Genomics: Large-Scale Analysis  
of DNA Sequences
The entire “library” of genetic instructions that an organism 
inherits is called its genome. A typical human cell has two 
similar sets of chromosomes, and each set has approximately 
3 billion nucleotide pairs of DNA. If the one-letter abbrevia-
tions for the nucleotides of a set were written in letters the 
size of those you are now reading, the genomic text would fill 
about 700 biology textbooks.
Since the early 1990s, the pace at which researchers can 
determine the sequence of a genome has accelerated at an 
astounding rate, enabled by a revolution in technology. 
The genome sequence—the entire sequence of nucleotides 
for a representative member of a species—is now known 
for humans and many other animals, as well as numerous 
plants, fungi, bacteria, and archaea. To make sense of the 
deluge of data from genome-sequencing projects and the 
growing catalog of known gene functions, scientists are 
applying a systems biology approach at the cellular and 
molecular levels. Rather than investigating a single gene at  Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
Lens 
cell
The lens of the eye (behind 
the pupil) is able to focus 
light because lens cells are 
tightly packed with transparent 
proteins called crystallin. How 
do lens cells make crystallin 
proteins?
The crystallin 
gene is a 
section of DNA 
in a chromosome.
DNA
(part of the 
crystallin gene)
Using the information in the sequence of 
DNA nucleotides, the cell makes (transcribes) 
a specific RNA molecule called mRNA.
The cell translates the information in the 
sequence of mRNA nucleotides to make a 
protein, a series of linked amino acids.
The chain of amino 
acids folds into the 
specific shape of a 
crystallin protein. 
Crystallin proteins can 
then pack together and 
focus light, allowing 
the eye to see.
Crystallin gene
Crystallin protein
UGGUU UUGGC CA
A
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
CA A A C GT
AC
G
CG T T TG
C
G
C
GT
A
T
mRNA
PROTEIN FOLDING
Protein
Chain of amino
acids
(a)
(b)A lens cell uses information in DNA to make crystallin proteins.
. Figure 1.8 Gene expression: Cells use information encoded 
in a gene to synthesize a functional protein.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   56 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 58 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 57
a time, researchers study whole sets of genes (or other DNA) 
in one or more species—an approach called genomics. 
Likewise, the term proteomics refers to the study of sets 
of proteins and their properties. (The entire set of proteins 
expressed by a given cell, tissue, or organism is called a 
proteome.)
Three important research developments have made the 
genomic and proteomic approaches possible. One is “high-
throughput” technology, tools that can analyze many bio-
logical samples very rapidly. The second major development 
is bioinformatics, the use of computational tools to store, 
organize, and analyze the huge volume of data that results 
from high-throughput methods. The third development is 
the formation of interdisciplinary research teams—groups 
of diverse specialists that may include computer scientists, 
mathematicians, engineers, chemists, physicists, and, of 
course, biologists from a variety of fields. Researchers in such 
teams aim to learn how the activities of all the proteins and 
RNAs encoded by the DNA are coordinated in cells and in 
whole organisms.
Theme: Life Requires the Transfer and 
Transformation of Energy and Matter
ENERGY AND MATTER  Moving, growing, reproducing, 
and the various cellular activities of life are work, and work 
requires energy. The input of energy, primarily from the sun, 
and the transformation of energy from one form to another 
make life possible (Figure 1.9). When a plant’s leaves absorb 
sunlight in the process of photosynthesis, molecules within 
the leaves convert the energy of sunlight to the chemical 
energy of food, such as sugars. The chemical energy in the 
food molecules is then passed along from plants and other 
photosynthetic organisms (producers) to consumers. 
A!consumer is an organism that feeds on other organisms or 
their remains.
When an organism uses chemical energy to perform work, 
such as muscle contraction or cell division, some of that 
energy is lost to the surroundings as heat. As a result, energy 
flows through an ecosystem in one direction, usually entering 
as light and exiting as heat. In contrast, chemicals cycle within 
an ecosystem, where they are used and then recycled (see 
Figure 1.9). Chemicals that a plant absorbs from the air or soil 
may be incorporated into the plant’s body and then passed 
to an animal that eats the plant. Eventually, these chemicals 
will be returned to the environment by decomposers such as 
bacteria and fungi that break down waste products, leaf litter, 
and the bodies of dead organisms. The chemicals are then 
available to be taken up by plants again, thereby completing 
the cycle.
Theme: From Molecules to Ecosystems, 
Interactions Are Important in Biological 
Systems
INTERACTIONS  At any level of the biological hierarchy, 
interactions between the components of the system ensure 
smooth integration of all the parts, such that they function 
as a whole. This holds true equally well for molecules in a 
cell!and the components of an ecosystem; we’ll look at both 
as examples.
Light
energy
comes from
the sun.
Plants
convert
sunlight to
chemical
energy. Organisms use
chemical energy
to do work.
Chemicals
ENERGY FLOW
Heat is lost
from the
ecosystem.
Chemicals in 
plants are passed 
to organisms that 
eat the plants.
Plants take up 
chemicals from 
the soil and air.
Decomposers
such as fungi and 
bacteria break 
down leaf litter 
and dead 
organisms, 
returning 
chemicals to the 
soil.
                     CHEMICAL CYCLING
c Figure 1.9 Energy flow 
and chemical cycling. There 
is a one-way flow of energy 
in an ecosystem: During 
photosynthesis, plants convert 
energy from sunlight to chemical 
energy (stored in food molecules 
such as sugars), which is used by 
plants and other organisms to 
do work and is eventually lost 
from the ecosystem as heat. In 
contrast, chemicals cycle between 
organisms and the physical 
environment.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   57 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 59 ===

58 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
plants compete for a soil resource that is in short supply. 
Interactions among organisms help regulate the function -
ing of the ecosystem as a whole.
Each organism also interacts continuously with physical 
factors in its environment. The leaves of a tree, for example, 
absorb light from the sun, take in carbon dioxide from the air, 
Molecules: Interactions Within Organisms
At lower levels of organization, the interactions between 
components that make up living organisms—organs, 
 tissues, cells, and molecules—are crucial to their smooth 
operation. Consider the regulation of blood sugar level, 
for!instance. Cells in the body must match the supply of 
fuel (sugar) to demand, regulating the opposing processes 
of!sugar breakdown and storage. The key is the ability of 
many biological processes to self-regulate by a mechanism 
called feedback.
In feedback regulation, the output or product 
of!a!process regulates that very process. The most com-
mon!form of regulation in living systems is negative 
 f e e d b a c k, a loop in which the response reduces the ini-
tial stimulus. As seen in the example of insulin signaling 
(Figure 1.10), after a meal the level of the sugar glucose 
in!your blood rises, which stimulates cells of the pancreas 
to!secrete insulin. Insulin, in turn, causes body cells to 
take!up glucose and liver cells to store it, thus decreas-
ing the blood glucose level. This eliminates the stimulus 
for!insulin secretion, shutting off the pathway. Thus, 
the!output of the process (insulin) negatively regulates 
that!process.
Though less common than processes regulated by nega-
tive feedback, there are also many biological processes regu-
lated by positive feedback, in which an end product speeds up 
its own production. The clotting of your blood in response 
to injury is an example. When a blood vessel is damaged, 
structures in the blood called platelets begin to aggregate 
at the site. Positive feedback occurs 
as chemicals released by the platelets 
attract more platelets. The platelet 
pileup then initiates a  complex process 
that seals the wound with a clot.
Ecosystems: An Organism’s 
Interactions with Other Organisms 
and the Physical Environment
At the ecosystem level, every organism 
interacts with other organisms. For 
instance, an acacia tree interacts with 
soil microorganisms associated with 
its roots, insects that live on it, and 
animals that eat its leaves and fruit 
(Figure 1.11). Interactions between 
organisms include those that are 
mutually beneficial (as when “cleaner 
fish” eat small parasites on a turtle) 
and those in which one species ben-
efits and the other is harmed (as when 
a lion kills and eats a zebra). In some 
interactions between species, both 
are harmed—for example, when two 
Sunlight
O2
CO2
Leaves absorb light 
energy from the sun. Leaves take in 
carbon dioxide 
from the air and 
release oxygen.
Animals eat leaves 
and fruit from the 
tree, returning 
nutrients and 
minerals to the  
soil in their waste 
products.
Leaves fall to the 
ground and are 
decomposed by 
organisms that 
return minerals 
to the soil.
Water and 
minerals in the 
soil are taken 
up by the 
tree through 
its roots. 
. Figure 1.11 Interactions of an African acacia tree with other organisms  
and the physical environment.
     Insulin circulates in the 
blood throughout the body.
Insulin
Negative feedback
–
Insulin-producing 
cell in pancreas
Glucose
in blood
1     A high blood glucose level 
stimulates cells in the pancreas 
to secrete insulin into the blood.
2
     Insulin binds to body cells, 
causing them to take up 
glucose and liver cells to store 
glucose. This lowers the glucose 
level in the blood.
3
     The lowered blood glucose 
level does not stimulate 
secretion of insulin.
4
. Figure 1.10 Feedback regulation. The human body regulates 
the use and storage of glucose, a major cellular fuel. This figure shows 
negative feedback: The response to insulin reduces the initial stimulus.
VISUAL SKILLS In this example, what is the response to insulin? What 
is the initial stimulus that is reduced by the response?
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   58 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 60 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 59
As we’ll explore in greater detail in Concept 56.4, the conse-
quences of these changes for humans and other organisms 
may be profound.
Having considered four of the unifying themes (organiza-
tion, information, energy and matter, and interactions), let’s 
now turn to evolution. There is consensus among biologists 
that evolution is the core theme of biology, and it is discussed 
in detail in the next section.
and release oxygen to the air (see Figure 1.11). The environ-
ment is also affected by organisms. For instance, in addition to 
taking up water and minerals from the soil, the roots of a plant 
break up rocks as they grow, contributing to the formation of 
soil. On a global scale, plants and other photosynthetic organ-
isms have generated all the oxygen in the atmosphere.
Like other organisms, we humans interact with our environ-
ment. Our interactions sometimes have dire consequences: 
For example, over the past 150 years, humans have greatly 
increased the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas). This 
practice releases large amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) and 
other gases into the atmosphere, causing heat to be!trapped 
close to Earth’s surface (see Figure 56.29). Scientists calculate 
that the CO2 added to the atmosphere by human activities has 
increased the average temperature of the planet by about 1°C 
since 1900. At the current rates that CO2 and other gases are 
being added to the atmosphere, global models predict an addi-
tional rise of at least 3°C before the end!of this century.
This ongoing global warming is a major aspect of climate 
change, a directional change to the global climate that lasts 
for three decades or more (as opposed to short-term changes 
in the weather). But global warming is not the only way the 
climate is changing: Wind and precipitation patterns are 
also shifting, and extreme weather events such as storms 
and droughts are occurring more often. Climate change has 
already affected organisms and their habitats all over the 
planet. For example, polar bears have lost much of the ice 
platform from which they hunt, leading to food shortages 
and increased mortality rates. As habitats deteriorate, hun-
dreds of plant and animal species are shifting their ranges to 
more suitable locations—but for some, there is insufficient 
suitable habitat, or they may not be able to migrate quickly 
enough. As a result, the populations of many species are 
shrinking in size or even disappearing (Figure 1.12). (For 
more examples of how climate change is affecting life on 
Earth, see Make Connections Figure 56.30.)
The loss of populations due to climate change can ulti-
mately result in extinction, the permanent loss of a species. 
c Figure 1.12 Threatened 
by global warming. A 
warmer environment causes 
lizards in the genus Sceloporus 
to spend more time in refuges 
from the heat, reducing time 
for foraging. Their food intake 
drops, decreasing reproductive 
success. Surveys of 200 
Sceloporus populations in 
Mexico show that 12% of these 
populations have disappeared 
since 1975.
CONCEPT CHECK 1.1
1. Starting with the molecular level in Figure 1.3, write a 
 sentence that includes components from the previous 
(lower) level of biological organization, for example: “A 
 molecule consists of atoms bonded together.” Continue 
with organelles, moving up the biological hierarchy.
2. Identify the theme or themes exemplified by (a) the sharp 
quills of a porcupine, (b) the development of a multicellular 
organism from a single fertilized egg, and (c) a humming-
bird using sugar to power its flight.
3. WHAT IF? For each theme discussed in this section, give an 
example not mentioned in the text.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 1.2
The Core Theme: Evolution 
accounts for the unity and 
diversity of life
EVOLUTION An understanding of evolution helps us to 
make sense of everything we know about life on Earth. As 
the fossil record clearly shows, life has been evolving for bil-
lions of years, resulting in a vast diversity of past and present 
organisms. But along with the diversity there is also unity, in 
the form of shared features. For example, while sea horses, 
jackrabbits, hummingbirds, and giraffes all look very differ-
ent, their skeletons are organized in the same basic way.
The scientific explanation for the unity and diversity of 
organisms is evolution: a process of biological change in 
which species accumulate differences from their ancestors as 
they adapt to different environments over time. Thus, we can 
account for differences between two species (diversity) with the 
idea that certain heritable changes occurred after the two spe-
cies diverged from their common ancestor. However, they also 
share certain traits (unity) simply because they have descended 
from a common ancestor. An abundance of evidence of differ-
ent types supports the occurrence of evolution and the mecha-
nisms that describe how it takes place, which we’ll explore in 
detail in Chapters 21–25. To quote one of the founders of mod-
ern evolutionary theory, Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Nothing in 
biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.” To under-
stand this statement, we need to examine how biologists think 
about the vast diversity of life on the planet.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   59 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 61 ===

60 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
The Three Domains of Life
Humans tend to group diverse items according to their similari-
ties and relationships to each other. Consequently, biologists 
have long used careful comparisons of structure, function, and 
other obvious features to classify forms of life into groups. In the 
last few decades, new methods of assessing species relationships, 
such as comparisons of DNA sequences, have led to a reevaluation 
of the classification of life. Although this reevaluation is ongoing, 
biologists currently place all organisms into three groups called 
domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya (Figure 1.13).
Two of the three domains—Bacteria and Archaea— 
consist of single-celled prokaryotic organisms. All the 
eukaryotes (organisms with eukaryotic cells) are in domain 
Eukarya. This domain includes four subgroups: kingdom 
Plantae, kingdom Fungi, kingdom Animalia, and the protists. 
The three kingdoms are distinguished partly by their modes 
of nutrition: Plants produce their own sugars and other food 
Classifying the Diversity of Life
Diversity is a hallmark of life. Biologists have so far identified 
and named about 1.8 million species of organisms. Each spe-
cies is given a two-part name: The first part is the name of the 
genus (plural, genera) to which the species belongs, and the 
second part is unique to the species within the genus. (For 
example, Homo sapiens is the name of our species.)
To date, known species include at least 100,000 species 
of fungi, 290,000 plant species, 57,000 vertebrate species 
(animals with backbones), and 1 million insect species (more 
than half of all known forms of life)—not to mention the 
myriad types of single-celled organisms. Researchers identify 
thousands of additional species each year. Estimates of the 
total number of species range from about 10 million to over 
100 million. Whatever the actual number, the enormous vari-
ety of life gives biology a very broad scope. Biologists face a 
major challenge in attempting to make sense of this variety.
Bacteria are the most diverse and widespread prokaryotes and are 
now classiƂed into Oultiple kingdoOs 'ach rod-shaped structure 
in this photo is a bacterial cell.
&oOain #rchaea includes Oultiple kingdoOs 5oOe of the 
prokaryotes known as archaea live in Earth’s extreme 
environOents, such as salty lakes and boiling hot springs 'ach 
round structure in this photo is an archaeal cell 
2 om
2 om
100 om
(a) Domain Bacteria
(c) Domain Eukarya
(b) Domain Archaea
m Kingdom Plantae (plants) 
consists of Oulticellular 
eukaryotes that carry out 
photosynthesis, the conversion  
of light energy to the chemical 
energy in food /ost plant 
species live on land.
b Kingdom Animalia 
consists of Oulticellular 
eukaryotes that ingest 
other organisms.
c Kingdom Fungi 
is characterized 
in part by the 
nutritional Oode of its OeObers 
such as this OushrooO, 
which absorb nutrients froO outside their bodies
c Protists are mostly 
unicellular eukaryotes 
and some relatively 
siOple Oulticellular 
relatives 2ictured 
here is an assortment 
of protists inhabiting 
pond water 5cientists are currently debating how to classify protists 
in a way that accurately reflects their evolutionary relationships
. Figure 1.13 The three domains of life.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   60 3/21/20   12:37 AM

=== SIDE 62 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 61
molecules by photosynthesis, fungi absorb nutrients in dis-
solved form from their surroundings, and animals obtain 
food by eating and digesting other organisms. Animalia is, of 
course, the kingdom to which we belong.
The most numerous and diverse eukaryotes are the protists, 
which are mostly single-celled organisms. Although protists were 
once placed in a single kingdom, they are now classified into sev-
eral groups. One major reason for this change is the recent DNA 
evidence showing that some protists are less closely related to 
other protists than they are to plants, animals, or fungi.
Unity in the Diversity of Life
As diverse as life is, there is also remarkable unity among forms 
of life. Consider, for example, the similar skeletons of different 
animals and the universal genetic language of DNA (the genetic 
code), both mentioned earlier. In fact, similarities between 
organisms are evident at all levels of the biological hierarchy. 
For example, unity is obvious in many features of cell structure, 
even among distantly related organisms (Figure 1.14).
How can we account for life’s dual nature of unity and diver-
sity? The process of evolution, explained next, illuminates both 
the similarities and differences in the world of life. It also intro-
duces another important dimension of biology: the passage of 
time. The history of life, as documented by fossils and other 
evidence, is the saga of an ever-changing Earth billions of years 
old, inhabited by an evolving cast of living forms (Figure 1.15).
Cilia of windpipe cells. The cells 
that line the human windpipe are 
equipped with cilia that help keep 
the lungs clean by sweeping a
film of debris-trapping mucus 
upward.
Cilia of Paramecium. The cilia of 
the single-celled Paramecium 
propel the organism through 
pond water.
Cross section of a 
cilium, as viewed with 
an electron microscope
0.1 om
15 om
5 om
. Figure 1.14 An example of unity underlying the diversity 
of life: the architecture of cilia in eukaryotes. Cilia (singular, 
cilium) are extensions of cells that function in locomotion. They 
occur in eukaryotes as diverse as Paramecium (found in pond 
water) and humans. Even organisms so different share a common 
architecture for their cilia, which have an elaborate system of 
tubules that is striking in cross-sectional views.
. Figure 1.15 Studying the history of life. Researchers in South 
Africa reconstruct skeletons of Homo naledi, an extinct relative of 
Homo sapiens. The fossils were discovered in an underground cave 
that may have been a burial chamber.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   61 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 63 ===

62 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
Over many generations, a higher and higher proportion of 
individuals in a population will have the advantageous traits. 
Evolution occurs as the unequal reproductive success of indi-
viduals ultimately leads to adaptation to their environment, 
as long as the environment remains the same.
Darwin called this mechanism of evolutionary adapta-
tion natural selection because the natural environment 
consistently “selects” for the propagation of certain traits 
among naturally occurring variant traits in the population. 
The example in Figure 1.18 illustrates the ability of natural 
selection to “edit” an insect population’s heritable varia-
tions in coloration. We see the products of natural selection 
in the exquisite adaptations of various organisms to the 
special circumstances of their way of life and their environ-
ment. The wings of the bat shown in Figure 1.19 are an 
excellent example of adaptation.
Charles Darwin and the Theory  
of Natural Selection
An evolutionary view of life came into sharp focus in 
November 1859, when Charles Darwin published one of the 
most important and influential books ever written, On the 
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection (Figure 1.16). 
The Origin of Species articulated two main points. The first 
point was that, as species adapt to different environments 
over time, they accumulate differences from their ancestors. 
Darwin called this process “descent with  modification.” 
This insightful phrase captured the duality of life’s unity 
and diversity—unity in the kinship among species that 
descended from common ancestors and diversity in the 
modifications that evolved as species branched from their 
common ancestors (Figure 1.17). Darwin’s second main 
point was his proposal that “natural selection” is a primary 
cause of descent with modification.
Darwin developed his theory of natural selection from 
observations that by themselves were neither new nor pro-
found. However, although others had described the pieces 
of the puzzle, it was Darwin who saw how they fit together. 
He started with the following three observations from 
nature: First, individuals in a population vary in their traits, 
many of which seem to be heritable (passed on from parents 
to offspring). Second, a population can produce far more 
offspring than can survive to produce offspring of their 
own. With more individuals than the environment is able 
to support, competition is inevitable. Third, species gener-
ally are suited to their environments—in other words, they 
are adapted to their circumstances. For instance, a common 
adaptation among birds that eat hard seeds is an especially 
strong beak.
By making inferences from these three observations, 
Darwin developed a scientific explanation for how evolution 
occurs. He reasoned that individuals with inherited traits 
that are better suited to the local environment are more likely 
to survive and reproduce than less well-suited individuals. 
. Figure 1.16 Charles Darwin. The portrait shows Darwin in 
about 1840, well before the 1859 publication of his revolutionary 
book, commonly referred to as The Origin of Species.
. American flamingo
    (Phoenicopterus ruber)
. Red-tailed hawk (Buteo borealis)
m European robin
    (Erithacus rubecula)
m Gentoo penguin
(Pygoscelis papua)
. Figure 1.17 Unity and diversity among birds. These four 
birds are variations on a common body plan. For example, each has 
feathers, a beak, and wings. However, these common features are 
highly specialized for the birds’ diverse lifestyles.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   62 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 64 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 63
Darwin proposed that natural selection, by its cumulative 
effects over long periods of time, could cause an ancestral spe-
cies to give rise to two or more descendant species. This could 
occur, for example, if one population of organisms became 
fragmented into several subpopulations isolated in different 
environments. In these separate arenas of natural selection, 
one species could gradually radiate into multiple species as 
the geographically isolated populations adapted over many 
generations to different environmental conditions.
The Galápagos finches are a famous example of the process 
of radiation of new species from a common ancestor. Darwin 
collected specimens of these birds during his 1835 visit to the 
remote Galápagos Islands, 900 kilometers (km) off the Pacific 
coast of South America. These relatively young volcanic 
islands are home to many species of plants and animals found 
nowhere else in the world, though many Galápagos organ-
isms are clearly related to species on the South American 
mainland. The Galápagos finches are thought to have 
descended from an ancestral finch species that reached the 
archipelago from South America or the Caribbean. Over time, 
the Galápagos finches diversified from their ancestor as popu-
lations became adapted to different food sources on their 
particular islands. Years after Darwin collected the finches, 
researchers began to sort out their evolutionary relationships, 
first from anatomical and geographic data and more recently 
with the help of DNA sequence comparisons.
 Mastering Biology Video: Galápagos Biodiversity  
by Peter and Rosemary Grant
Biologists’ diagrams of evolutionary relationships gener-
ally take treelike forms, though the trees are often turned 
The Tree of Life
Take another look at the skeletal architecture of the bat’s 
wings in Figure 1.19. These wings are not like those of feath-
ered birds; the bat is a mammal. The bones, joints, nerves, 
and blood vessels in the bat’s forelimbs, though adapted 
for flight, are very similar to those in the human arm, the 
foreleg of a horse, and the flipper of a whale. Indeed, all 
mammalian forelimbs are anatomical variations of a com-
mon architecture. According to the Darwinian concept of 
descent with modification, the shared anatomy of mam-
malian limbs reflects inheritance of the limb structure from 
a common ancestor—the “prototype” mammal from which 
all other mammals descended. The diversity of mammalian 
forelimbs results from modification by natural selection 
operating over millions of years in different environmental 
contexts. Fossils and other evidence corroborate anatomical 
unity in supporting this view of mammalian descent from a 
common ancestor.
DRAW IT Over time, the soil will gradually become lighter in color. Draw another step 
to show how the soil, when lightened to medium color, would affect natural selection. 
Write a caption for this new step 5. Then explain how the population would change 
over time as the soil becomes lighter.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Making 
of The Fittest: Natural Selection and  
Adaptation (Rock Pocket Mouse) 
Population with varied 
inherited traits 
1 Elimination of individuals 
with certain traits that 
make them more visible
2 Reproduction of 
survivors
3 Increased frequency 
of traits that enhance 
survival and repro-
ductive success 
4
. Figure 1.18 Natural selection. This imaginary beetle population has colonized a locale where the 
soil has been blackened by a recent brush fire. Initially, the population varies extensively in the inherited 
coloration of the individuals, from very light gray to charcoal. For hungry birds that prey on the beetles, it 
is easiest to spot the beetles that are lightest in color.
m Figure 1.19 Evolutionary adaptation. Bats, 
the only mammals capable of active flight, have 
wings with webbing between extended “fingers.” 
Darwin proposed that such adaptations are 
refined over time by natural selection.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   63 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 65 ===

64 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
In studying nature, scientists 
form and test hypotheses
Science is a way of knowing—an approach to understand-
ing the natural world. It developed out of our curiosity 
about ourselves, other life-forms, our planet, and the uni-
verse. The word science is derived from a Latin verb meaning 
“to know.” Striving to understand seems to be one of our 
basic urges.
At the heart of science is inquiry, the search for informa-
tion and explanations of natural phenomena. There is no 
formula for successful scientific inquiry, no single scientific 
method that researchers must rigidly follow. As in all quests, 
science includes elements of challenge, adventure, and luck, 
along with careful planning, reasoning, creativity, patience, 
and the persistence to overcome setbacks. Such diverse ele-
ments of inquiry make science far less structured than most 
people realize. That said, it is possible to highlight certain 
characteristics that help to distinguish science from other 
ways of describing and explaining nature.
Scientists use a process of inquiry that includes  making 
observations, forming logical, testable explanations 
 (hypotheses), and testing them. The process is necessarily 
repetitive: In testing a hypothesis, more observations may 
inspire revision of the original hypothesis or formation 
of a new one, thus leading to further testing. In this way, 
 scientists circle closer and closer to their best estimation of 
the laws governing nature.
sideways as in Figure 1.20. Tree diagrams make sense: Just 
as an individual has a genealogy that can be diagrammed as 
a family tree, each species is one twig of a branching tree of 
life extending back in time through ancestral species more 
and more remote. Species that are very similar, such as the 
Galápagos finches, share a relatively recent common ances-
tor. Through an ancestor that lived much further back in 
time, finches are related to sparrows, hawks, penguins, and all 
other birds. Furthermore, finches and other birds are related 
to us through a common ancestor even more ancient. Trace 
life back far enough, and we reach the early prokaryotes that 
inhabited Earth over 3.5 billion years ago. We can recognize 
their vestiges in our own cells—in the universal genetic code, 
for example. Indeed, all of life is connected through its long 
evolutionary history.
ANCESTRAL
FINCH
)reen warbler Ƃnch
Certhidea olivacea

insect-eater
8egetarian finch
Platyspiza crassirostris

fruit-eater
9oodpecker finch
Camarhynchus pallidus

insect-eater
%oOOon cactus finch
Geospiza scandens

cactus-eater
5Oall tree finch
Camarhynchus parvulus

insect-eater
.arge ground finch
Geospiza
magnirostris

seed-eater
Branch point: where 
lineages diverge 
from a common 
ancestor
Common ancestor of finches in 
the genera Camarhynchus and 
Geospiza
c Figure 1.20 Descent with 
modification: adaptive radiation of 
finches on the Galápagos Islands. 
This!“tree” illustrates a current hypothesis 
for the evolutionary relationships of 
finches on the Galápagos. Note the 
various beaks, which are adapted to 
particular food sources. For example, 
heavier, thicker beaks are better at 
cracking seeds, while the more slender 
beaks are better at grasping insects.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video:  
The Origin of Species:  
The Beak of the Finch 
CONCEPT CHECK 1.2
1. Explain why “editing” is a metaphor for how natural selec-
tion acts on a population’s heritable variation.
2. Referring to Figure 1.20, provide a possible explanation for 
how, over a very long time, the green warbler finch came to 
have a slender beak.
3. DRAW IT The three domains you learned about in 
Concept!1.2 can be represented in the tree of life as the three 
main branches, with three subbranches on the eukaryotic 
branch being the kingdoms Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia. 
What if fungi and animals are more closely related to each 
other than either of these kingdoms is to plants—as recent 
evidence strongly suggests? Draw a simple branching pattern 
that symbolizes the proposed relationship between these 
three eukaryotic kingdoms.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 1.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   64 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 66 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 65
Forming and Testing Hypotheses
Our innate curiosity often stimulates us to pose ques-
tions about the natural basis for the phenomena we 
observe in the world. What caused the different chim-
panzee behaviors observed in the wild? What explains 
the variation in coat color among the mice of a single 
species, shown in Figure!1.1? Answering such ques-
tions usually involves forming and testing logical 
explanations—that!is,!hypotheses.
In science, a hypothesis is an explanation, based on 
observations and assumptions, that leads to a testable predic-
tion. Said another way, a hypothesis is an explanation on 
trial. The hypothesis is usually a rational accounting for a set 
of observations, based on the available data and guided by 
inductive reasoning. A scientific hypothesis must lead to pre-
dictions that can be tested by making additional observations 
or by performing experiments. An experiment is a scientific 
test, carried out under controlled conditions.
We all make observations and develop questions and 
hypotheses in solving everyday problems. Let’s say, for 
example, that your desk lamp is plugged in and turned on 
but the bulb isn’t lit. That’s an observation. The question 
is obvious: Why doesn’t the lamp work? Two reasonable 
hypotheses based on your experience are that (1) the bulb 
is burnt out or (2) the bulb is not screwed in properly. Each 
of these alternative hypotheses leads to predictions you 
can test with experiments. For example, the burnt-out bulb 
hypothesis predicts that replacing the bulb will fix the prob-
lem. Figure 1.22 diagrams this informal inquiry. Figuring 
things out in this way by trial and error is a hypothesis-
based approach.
Exploration and Observation
Biology, like other sciences, begins with careful observa-
tions. In gathering information, biologists often use tools 
such as microscopes, precision thermometers, or high-speed 
cameras that extend their senses or facilitate careful mea-
surement. Observations can reveal valuable information 
about the natural world. For example, a series of detailed 
observations have shaped our understanding of cell struc-
ture, and another set of observations is currently expand-
ing our databases of genome sequences from diverse spe-
cies and!databases of genes whose expression is altered in 
 v a r i o u s ! d i s e a s e s .
In exploring nature, biologists also rely heavily on the 
scientific literature, the published contributions of fellow 
scientists. By reading about and understanding past studies, 
scientists can build on the foundation of existing knowledge, 
focusing their investigations on observations that are original 
and on hypotheses that are consistent with previous findings. 
Identifying publications relevant to a new line of research is 
now easier than at any point in the past, thanks to indexed 
and searchable electronic databases.
Gathering and Analyzing Data
Recorded observations are called data. Put another way, 
data are items of information on which scientific inquiry 
is based. The term data implies numbers to many people. 
But some data are qualitative, often in the form of recorded 
descriptions rather than numerical measurements. For 
example, Jane Goodall spent decades recording her obser-
vations of chimpanzee behavior during field research in 
a Tanzanian jungle (Figure 1.21). In her studies, Goodall 
also!enriched the field of animal behavior with volumes 
of quantitative data, such as the frequency and duration 
of specific behaviors for different members of a group of 
 chimpanzees in a variety of situations. Quantitative data 
are generally expressed as numerical measurements and 
often organized into tables and graphs. Scientists analyze 
their data using a type of mathematics called statistics to 
test whether their results are significant or merely due to 
random fluctuations. All results presented in this text have 
been shown to be statistically significant.
Collecting and analyzing observations can lead to impor-
tant conclusions based on a type of logic called inductive 
reasoning. Through induction, we derive generalizations 
from a large number of specific observations. “The sun always 
rises in the east” is one example. Another biological example 
is the generalization “All organisms are made of cells,” which 
was based on two centuries of microscopic observations made 
by biologists examining cells in diverse biological specimens. 
Careful observations and data analyses, along with general-
izations reached by induction, are fundamental to our under-
standing of nature.
. Figure 1.21 Jane Goodall collecting qualitative data on 
chimpanzee behavior. Goodall recorded her observations in field 
notebooks, often with sketches of the animals’ behavior.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Jane Goodall:  
Living with chimpanzees
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   65 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 67 ===

66 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
most likely explanation, but testing supports that hypoth-
esis not by proving that it is correct, but rather by failing to 
prove it incorrect. For example, even if replacing the bulb 
fixed the desk lamp, it might have been because there was 
a temporary power outage that just happened to end while 
the bulb was being changed.
Although a hypothesis can never be proved beyond all 
doubt, testing it in various ways can significantly increase 
our confidence in its validity. Often, rounds of hypothesis 
formulation and testing lead to a scientific consensus—the  
shared conclusion of many scientists that a particular 
hypothesis explains the known data well and stands up to 
experimental testing.
Questions That Can and Cannot  
Be Addressed by Science
Scientific inquiry is a powerful way to learn about nature, 
but there are limitations to the kinds of questions it can 
answer. A scientific hypothesis must be testable; there must 
be some observation or experiment that could reveal if 
such an idea is likely to be true or false. The hypothesis that 
a burnt-out bulb is the sole reason the lamp doesn’t work 
would not be supported if replacing the bulb with a new one 
didn’t fix the lamp.
Not all hypotheses meet the criteria of science: 
You!wouldn’t be able to test the hypothesis that invisible 
ghosts are fooling with your desk lamp! Because science 
only deals with natural, testable explanations for natu -
ral phenomena, it can neither support nor contradict 
the!invisible ghost hypothesis, nor whether spirits or 
elves!cause storms, rainbows, or illnesses. Such super -
natural explanations are simply outside the bounds of 
 s c i e n c e , ! a s  a r e  r e l i g i o u s  m a t t e r s ,  w h i c h  a r e  i s s u e s  o f  p e r-
sonal faith. Science and religion are not mutually exclu -
sive or contradictory; they are simply concerned with 
 d i f f e r e n t  i s s u e s .
The Flexibility of the Scientific Process
The way that researchers answer questions about the 
 natural and physical world is often idealized as the 
 scientific method. However, very few scientific inquiries 
adhere!rigidly to the sequence of steps that are typically 
used to describe this approach. For example, a scientist 
may start to design an experiment, but then backtrack 
after realizing that more preliminary observations are 
 n e c e s s a r y .  I n  o t h e r  c a s e s ,  o b s e r v a t i o n s  r e m a i n  t o o  p u z-
zling to prompt well-defined questions until further 
study!provides a new context in which to view those 
observations. For example, scientists could not unravel 
the details of how genes encode proteins until after the 
 discovery of the structure of DNA (an event that took 
place!in!1953).
Deductive Reasoning
A type of logic called deduction is also built into the use 
of hypotheses in science. While induction entails reason-
ing from a set of specific observations to reach a general 
conclusion, deductive reasoning involves logic that 
flows in the opposite direction, from the general to the 
specific. From general premises, we extrapolate to the 
specific results we should expect if the premises are true. 
In the scientific process, deductions usually take the form 
of predictions of results that will be found if a particular 
hypothesis (premise) is correct. We then test the hypoth-
esis by carrying out experiments or observations to see 
whether or not the results are as predicted. This deductive 
testing takes the form of “If . . . then” logic. In the case of 
the desk lamp!example: If the burnt-out bulb hypothesis is 
correct, then the lamp should work if you replace the bulb 
with a!new one.
We can use the desk lamp example to illustrate two 
other key points about the use of hypotheses in sci-
ence. First, one can always devise additional hypotheses 
to explain a set of observations. For instance, another 
hypothesis to explain our nonworking desk lamp is that 
the wall socket is faulty. Although you could design an 
experiment to test this hypothesis, you can never test all 
possible hypotheses. Second, we can never prove that a 
hypothesis is true. Suppose that replacing the bulb fixed 
the lamp. The burnt-out bulb hypothesis would be the 
Observation: Desk lamp doesn’t work.
Question: Why doesn’t the desk lamp work?
Hypothesis #1:
Bulb is burnt out.
Prediction: Replacing 
bulb will fix problem.
Test of prediction:
Replace bulb.
Hypothesis #2:
Bulb is improperly screwed in.
Prediction: Reinstalling
bulb will fix problem.
Test of prediction: 
Reinstall bulb.
Result:
Desk lamp doesn't work.
Hypothesis is not supported.
Result:
Lamp works.
Hypothesis is supported.
. Figure 1.22 A simplified view of the scientific process. The 
idealized process sometimes called the “scientific method” is shown 
in this flow chart, which illustrates hypothesis testing for a desk lamp 
that doesn’t work.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   66 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 68 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 67
which hypotheses are tested, how test results are interpreted, 
and what value is placed on the findings. Similarly, societal 
needs—such as the push to cure cancer or understand the pro-
cess of climate change—may help shape what research proj-
ects are funded and how extensively the results are discussed.
Now that we have highlighted the key features of scien-
tific inquiry—making observations and forming and testing 
hypotheses—you should be able to recognize these features in 
a case study of actual scientific research.
A more realistic model of the scientific process is shown 
in Figure 1.23. The focus of this model, shown in the central 
circle in the figure, is the forming and testing of hypotheses. 
This core set of activities is the reason that science does so well 
in explaining phenomena in the natural world. These activi-
ties, however, are shaped by exploration and discovery (the 
upper circle in Figure 1.23) and influenced by interactions 
with other scientists and with society more generally (lower 
circles). For example, the community of scientists influences 
EXPLORATION AND DISCOVERY
• Forming hypotheses
• Predicting results
• Doing experiments and/or
   making observations
• Gathering data
• Analyzing results
Interpreting Results
Data may…
• Support a hypothesis
• Contradict a hypothesis
• Inspire a revised or new 
   hypothesis
• Observing nature
• Asking questions
• Reading the 
scientific literature
SOCIETAL BENEFITS AND OUTCOM
ES
• Developing 
technology
• Informing policy
• Solving problems
• Building 
knowledge
 
• Feedback and 
peer review
• Replication of 
findings
• Publication
• Consensus 
building
FORMING AND TESTING HYPOTHESES
Testing Ideas
COM
MUNITY ANALYSIS AND FEEDBACK
. Figure 1.23 The process of science: a realistic model. In reality, the process of science is 
not linear, but instead involves backtracking, repetitions, and feedback between different parts 
of the process. This!illustration is based on a model (How!Science Works) from!the website 
Understanding Science (www.understandingscience.org).
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   67 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 69 ===

68 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
so that the models differed only in their color patterns. The 
researchers placed equal numbers of these model mice ran-
domly in both habitats and left them overnight. The mouse 
models resembling the native mice in the habitat were the 
control group (for instance, light-colored mouse models in the 
beach habitat), while the mouse models with the non-native 
coloration were the experimental group (for example, darker 
models in the beach habitat). The following morning, the 
team counted and recorded signs of predation events, which 
ranged from bites and gouge marks on some models to the 
outright disappearance of others. Judging by the shape of the 
predators’ bites and the tracks surrounding the experimental 
sites, the predators appeared to be split fairly evenly between 
mammals (such as foxes and coyotes) and birds (such as owls, 
herons, and hawks).
For each environment, the researchers then calculated the 
percentage of predation events that targeted camouflaged 
models. The results were clear-cut: Camouflaged models 
showed much lower predation rates than those lacking cam-
ouflage in both the beach habitat (where light mice were less 
vulnerable) and the inland habitat (where dark mice were less 
vulnerable). The data thus fit the key prediction of the cam-
ouflage hypothesis.
Variables and Controls in Experiments
In carrying out an experiment, a researcher often manipu-
lates one factor in a system and observes the effects of this 
change. The mouse camouflage experiment described in 
Figure 1.25 is an example of a controlled experiment, one 
that is designed to compare an experimental group (the non- 
camouflaged mice models, in this case) with a control group 
(the camouflaged models). Both the factor that is manipulated 
and the factor that is subsequently measured are  variables—a 
feature or quantity that varies in an experiment.
A Case Study in Scientific Inquiry: 
Investigating Coat Coloration in  
Mouse Populations
Our case study begins with a set of observations and induc-
tive generalizations. Color patterns of animals vary widely in 
nature, sometimes even among members of the same species. 
What accounts for such variation? As you may recall, the two 
mice depicted at the beginning of this chapter are members 
of the same species (Peromyscus polionotus), but they have 
different coat (fur) color patterns and reside in different envi-
ronments. The beach mouse lives along the Florida seashore, 
a habitat of brilliant white sand dunes with sparse clumps of 
beach grass. The inland mouse lives on darker, more fertile 
soil farther inland (Figure 1.24). Even a brief glance at the 
photographs in Figure 1.24 reveals a striking match of mouse 
coloration to its habitat. The natural predators of these mice, 
including hawks, owls, foxes, and coyotes, are all visual 
hunters (they use their sense of sight to look for prey). It was 
logical, therefore, for Francis Bertody Sumner, a naturalist 
studying populations of these mice in the 1920s, to form 
the hypothesis that their coloration patterns had evolved as 
adaptations that camouflage the mice in their native environ-
ments, protecting them from predation.
As obvious as the camouflage hypothesis may seem, it 
still required testing. In 2010, biologist Hopi Hoekstra of 
Harvard University and a group of her students headed to 
Florida to test the prediction that mice with coloration that 
did not match their habitat would be preyed on more heav-
ily than the native, well-matched mice. Figure 1.25 sum-
marizes this field experiment, introducing a format we will 
use throughout the book to walk through other examples of 
biological inquiry.
The researchers built hundreds of models of mice and 
spray-painted them to resemble either beach or inland mice, 
Beach
population
Florida Inland
population
GULF OF 
MEXICO
Beach mice live on sparsely vegetated sand dunes along the coast. The 
light tan, dappled fur on their backs causes them to blend into their 
surroundings, providing camouflage.
Members of the same species living about 30 km inland have dark fur 
on their backs, camouflaging them against the dark ground of their 
habitat.
Beach population Inland population
. Figure 1.24 Different coloration in beach and inland populations 
of!Peromyscus polionotus.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   68 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 70 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 69
the low predation rate on models cam-
ouflaged with respect to the surrounding 
environment.
A common misconception is that 
the term controlled experiment means 
that scientists control all features of the 
experimental environment. But that’s 
impossible in field research and can be 
very difficult even in highly regulated 
laboratory environments. Researchers 
usually “control” unwanted variables 
not by eliminating them through envi-
ronmental regulation, but by canceling 
out their effects by using control groups.
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
 Introduction to Experimental Design
Theories in Science
“It’s just a theory!” Our everyday use of 
the term theory often implies an untested 
speculation. But the term theory has a dif-
ferent meaning in science. What is a sci-
entific theory, and how is it different from 
a hypothesis or from mere speculation?
First, a scientific theory is much 
broader in scope than a hypothesis. This 
is a hypothesis: “Coat coloration well-
matched to their habitat is an adaptation 
that protects mice from predators.” But 
this is a theory: “Evolutionary adaptations 
arise by natural selection.” This theory 
proposes that natural selection is the evo-
lutionary mechanism that accounts for an 
enormous variety of adaptations, of which 
coat color in mice is but one example.
Second, a theory is general enough 
to spin off many new, testable hypoth-
eses. For example, the theory of natural 
In our example, the color of the mouse model was the 
independent variable—the factor being manipulated 
by the researchers. The dependent variable is the fac-
tor being measured that is predicted to be affected by the 
independent variable; in this case, the researchers mea-
sured the amount of predation in response to variation 
in color of the mouse model. Note also that the experi-
mental and control groups differ in only one independent 
variable:!color.
As a result, the researchers could rule out other factors as 
causes of the more frequent attacks on the non-camouflaged 
mice—such as different numbers of predators or different tem-
peratures in the different test areas. The clever experimental 
design left coloration as the only factor that could account for 
Experiment H o p i  H o e k s t r a  a n d  c o l l e a g u e s  t e s t e d  t h e  h y p o t h e s i s  t h a t  c o a t  c o l o r -
ation provides camouflage that protects beach and inland populations of Peromyscus 
polionotus mice from predation in their habitats. The researchers spray-painted mouse 
models with light or dark color patterns that matched those of the beach and inland 
mice and placed models with each of the patterns in both habitats. The next morning, 
they counted damaged or missing models.
Results F o r  e a c h  h a b i t a t ,  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r s  c a l c u l a t e d  t h e  p e r c e n t a g e  o f  a t t a c k e d  m o d-
els that were camouflaged or non-camouflaged. In both habitats, the models whose 
pattern did not match their surroundings suffered much higher “predation” than did 
the camouflaged models.
0
100
50
Light models Dark models Light models Dark models
Percentage of 
attacked models
Camouflaged
(control)
Camouflaged
(control)
Non-camouflaged
(experimental)
Non-camouflaged
(experimental)
Beach habitat Inland habitat
Conclusion The results are consistent with the researchers’ prediction: that mouse 
models with camouflage coloration would be attacked less often than non- camouflaged 
mouse models. Thus, the experiment supports the camouflage hypothesis.
Data from S. N. Vignieri, J. G. Larson, and H. E. Hoekstra, The selective advantage of crypsis in mice, Evolution 
64:2153–2158 (2010).
INTERPRET THE DATA The bars indicate the percentage of the attacked models that were 
either light or dark. Assume 100 mouse models were attacked in each habitat. For the"beach 
habitat, how many were light models? Dark models? Answer the same questions for the inland 
habitat. Do the results of the experiment support the camouflage hypothesis? Explain.
Does camouflage affect predation rates on two populations 
of!mice?
. Figure 1.25 Inquiry
selection motivated two researchers at Princeton University, 
Peter and Rosemary Grant, to test the specific hypothesis that 
the beaks of Galápagos finches evolve in response to changes 
in the types of available food. (Their results supported their 
hypothesis; see Figure 23.2.)
And third, compared to any one hypothesis, a theory is 
generally supported by a much greater body of evidence. The 
theory of natural selection has been supported by a vast quan-
tity of evidence, with more being found every day, and has not 
been contradicted by any scientific data. Those theories that 
become widely adopted in science (such as the theory of natu-
ral selection and the theory of gravity) explain a great diversity 
of observations and are supported by a vast accumulation of 
evidence.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   69 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 71 ===

70 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
researcher, D. W. Kaufman, 40 years earlier. You can study 
the design of Kaufman’s experiment and interpret the results 
in the Scientific Skills Exercise.
Scientific results are continually scrutinized through the 
repetition of observations and experiments. Scientists work-
ing in the same research field often check one another’s 
claims by attempting to confirm observations or repeat exper-
iments. If scientific colleagues cannot repeat experimental 
findings, this failure may reflect some underlying weakness in 
the original claim, which will then have to be revised. In this 
sense, science polices itself. Integrity and adherence to high 
professional standards in reporting results are central to the 
scientific endeavor, since the validity of experimental data is 
key to designing further lines of inquiry.
It is not unusual for several scientists to converge on the 
same research question. Some scientists enjoy the challenge 
of being first with an important discovery or key experiment, 
while others derive more satisfaction from cooperating with 
fellow scientists working on the same problem.
Cooperation is facilitated when scientists use the same 
organism. Often, it is a widely used model organism—a 
species that is easy to grow in the lab and lends itself par-
ticularly well to the questions being investigated. Because 
all species are evolutionarily related, such an organism 
may be viewed as a model for understanding the biology of 
other species and their diseases. Genetic studies of the fruit 
fly Drosophila melanogaster, for example, have taught us a 
lot about how genes work in other species, even humans. 
Some other popular model organisms are the mustard plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana, the soil worm Caenorhabditis elegans, the 
zebrafish Danio rerio, the mouse Mus musculus, and the bacte-
rium Escherichia coli. As you read through this book, note the 
many contributions that these and other model organisms 
have made to the study of life.
Biologists may approach interesting questions from different 
angles. Some biologists focus on ecosystems, while others study 
natural phenomena at the level of organisms or cells. This text 
is divided into units that look at biology at different levels and 
investigate problems through different approaches. Yet any 
given problem can be addressed from many perspectives, which 
in fact complement each other. For example, Hoekstra not only 
carried out field studies showing that coat coloration can affect 
predation rates but also did lab studies that uncovered at least 
one genetic mutation that underlies the differences between 
beach and inland mouse coloration. Her lab includes biologists 
specializing in different biological levels, allowing links to be 
made between the evolutionary adaptations she focuses on and 
their molecular basis in DNA sequences.
As a biology student, you can benefit from making connec-
tions between the different levels of biology. You can develop 
this skill by noticing when certain topics crop up again and 
again in different units. One such topic is sickle-cell disease, 
a well-understood genetic condition that is prevalent among 
Finally, scientists will sometimes modify or even reject 
a previously supported theory if new research consistently 
produces results that don’t fit. For example, biologists once 
lumped bacteria and archaea together as a kingdom of prokary-
otes. When new methods for comparing cells and molecules 
could be used to test such relationships, the evidence led scien-
tists to reject the theory that bacteria and archaea are members 
of the same kingdom. If there is “truth” in science, it is at best 
conditional, based on the weight of available evidence.
CONCEPT CHECK 1.3
1. What qualitative observation led to the quantitative study 
in Figure 1.25?
2. Contrast inductive reasoning with deductive reasoning.
3. Why is natural selection called a theory?
4. WHAT IF? In the deserts of New Mexico, the soils are mostly 
sandy, with occasional regions of black rock derived from lava 
flows that occurred about 1,000 years ago. Mice are found in 
both sandy and rocky areas, and owls are known predators. 
What might you expect about coat color in these two mouse 
populations? Explain. How would you use this ecosystem to 
further test the camouflage hypothesis?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 1.4
Science benefits from  
a cooperative approach  
and diverse viewpoints
Movies and cartoons sometimes portray scientists as loners 
in white lab coats, working in isolated labs. In reality, sci-
ence is an intensely social activity. Most scientists work in 
teams, which often include both graduate and undergradu-
ate students. And to succeed in science, it helps to be a good 
communicator. Research results have no impact until shared 
with a community of peers through seminars, publications, 
and websites. And, in fact, research papers aren’t published 
until they are vetted by colleagues in what is called the “peer 
review” process. The examples of scientific inquiry described 
in this book, for instance, have all been published in peer-
reviewed journals.
Building on the Work of Others
The great scientist Isaac Newton once said: “To explain all 
nature is too difficult a task for any one man or even for any 
one age. ’Tis much better to do a little with certainty, and 
leave the rest for others that come after you.” Anyone who 
becomes a scientist, driven by curiosity about how nature 
works, is sure to benefit greatly from the rich storehouse of 
discoveries by others who have come before. In fact, Hopi 
Hoekstra’s experiment benefited from the work of another 
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   70 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 72 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 71
Though science and technology sometimes employ simi-
lar inquiry patterns, their basic goals differ. The goal of 
science is to understand natural phenomena, while that 
of technology is to apply scientific knowledge for some 
specific purpose. Because scientists put new technology 
to work in!their research, science and technology are 
interdependent.
The potent combination of science and technology can 
have dramatic effects on society. Sometimes, the applications 
of basic research that turn out to be the most beneficial come 
out of the blue, from completely unanticipated observations 
in the course of scientific exploration. For example, discovery 
of the structure of DNA by Watson and Crick in 1953 and sub-
sequent achievements in DNA science led to the technologies 
of DNA manipulation that are transforming applied fields 
native inhabitants of Africa and other warm regions and their 
descendants. Sickle-cell disease will appear in several units 
of the text, each time addressed at a new level. In addition, 
Make Connections figures connect the content in different 
chapters, and Make Connections questions ask you to make 
the connections yourselves. We hope these features will help 
you integrate the material you’re learning and enhance your 
enjoyment of biology by encouraging you to keep the big pic-
ture in mind.
Science, Technology, and Society
The research community is part of society at large, and 
the relationship of science to society becomes clearer 
when we add technology to the picture (see Figure 1.23). 
How much does camouflage affect predation on mice by 
owls with and without moonlight? D. W. Kaufman hypoth-
esized that the extent to which the coat color of a mouse con-
trasted with the color of its surroundings would affect the rate 
of nighttime predation by owls. He also hypothesized that the 
contrast would be affected by the amount of moonlight. In this 
exercise, you will analyze data from his studies of owl predation 
on mice that tested these hypotheses.
How the Experiment Was Done Pairs of mice (Peromyscus 
polionotus) with different coat colors, one light brown and one 
dark brown, were released simultaneously into an enclosure 
that!contained a hungry owl. The researcher recorded the color 
of the mouse that was first caught by the owl. If the owl did not 
catch either mouse within 15 minutes, the test was recorded as 
a zero. The release trials were repeated multiple times in enclo-
sures with either a dark-colored soil surface or a light-colored soil 
surface. The presence or absence of moonlight during each assay 
was recorded.
Data from the Experiment
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Full moon No moon
A: Light-colored soil
Light coat
Dark coat
Number of mice caught
Number of mice caught
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Full moon No moon
B: Dark-colored soil
Light coat
Dark coat
Data from D. W. Kaufman, Adaptive coloration in Peromyscus polionotus: 
Experimental selection by owls, Journal of Mammalogy 55:271–283 (1974).
Interpreting a Pair of Bar Graphs
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. First, make sure you understand 
how the graphs are set up. Graph 
A shows data from the light-
colored soil enclosure and graph 
B from the dark-colored enclo-
sure, but in all other respects the 
graphs are the same. (a) There 
is more than one independent variable in these graphs. What 
are the independent variables, the variables that were tested 
by the researcher? Which axis of the graphs has the indepen-
dent variables? (b) What is the dependent variable, the re-
sponse to the variables being tested? Which axis of the graphs 
has the dependent variable?
2. (a) How many dark brown mice were caught in the light-colored 
soil enclosure on a moonlit night? (b) How many dark brown 
mice were caught in the dark-colored soil enclosure on a moonlit 
night? (c) On a moonlit night, would a dark brown mouse be 
more likely to escape predation by owls on dark- or light-colored 
soil? Explain your answer.
3. (a) Is a dark brown mouse on dark-colored soil more likely to 
escape predation under a full moon or with no moon? (b) What 
about a light brown mouse on light-colored soil? Explain.
4. (a) Under which conditions would a dark brown mouse be most 
likely to escape predation at night? (b) A light brown mouse?
5. (a) What combination of independent variables led to the high-
est predation level in enclosures with light-colored soil? (b) What 
combination of independent variables led to the highest preda-
tion level in enclosures with dark-colored soil?
6. Thinking about your answers to question 5, provide a simple 
statement describing conditions that are especially deadly for 
either color of mouse.
7. Combining the data from both graphs, estimate the number 
of mice caught in moonlight versus no-moonlight conditions. 
Which condition is optimal for predation by the owl? Explain.
  Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   71 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 73 ===

72 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes
The Value of Diverse Viewpoints in Science
Many of the technological innovations with the most pro-
found impact on human society originated in settlements 
along trade routes, where a rich mix of different cultures 
ignited new ideas. For example, the printing press, which 
helped spread knowledge to all social classes, was invented 
by the German Johannes Gutenberg around 1440. This 
invention relied on several innovations from China, includ-
ing paper and ink. Paper traveled along trade routes from 
China to Baghdad, where technology was developed for its 
mass production. This technology then migrated to Europe, 
as did water-based ink from China, which was modified 
by Gutenberg to become oil-based ink. We have the cross- 
fertilization of diverse cultures to thank for the printing press, 
and the same can be said for other important inventions.
Along similar lines, science benefits from a diversity 
of backgrounds and viewpoints among its practitioners. 
But!just how diverse a population are scientists in relation 
to!gender, race, ethnicity, and other!attributes?
The scientific community reflects the cultural standards 
and behaviors of the society around it. It is therefore not sur-
prising that until recently, women, people of color, and other 
underrepresented groups have faced huge obstacles in their 
pursuit to become professional scientists in many countries 
around the world. Over the past 50 years, changing attitudes 
about career choices have increased the proportion of women 
in biology and some other sciences, so that now women 
constitute roughly half of undergraduate biology majors and 
biology Ph.D. students.
The pace has been slow at higher levels in the profession, 
however, and women and many racial and ethnic groups 
are still significantly underrepresented in many branches of 
science and technology. This lack of diversity hampers the 
progress of science. The more voices that are heard at the 
table, the more robust, valuable, and productive the scientific 
interchange will be. The authors of this text welcome all stu-
dents to the community of biologists, wishing you the joys 
and satisfactions of this exciting field of science.
such as medicine, agriculture, and forensics (Figure!1.26). 
Perhaps Watson and Crick envisioned that their discovery 
would someday lead to important applications, but it is 
unlikely that they could have predicted exactly what all those 
applications would be.
The directions that technology takes depend less on the 
curiosity that drives basic science than on the current needs 
and wants of people and on the social environment of the 
times. Debates about technology center more on “should 
we do it” than “can we do it.” With advances in technology 
come difficult choices. For example, under what circum-
stances is it acceptable to use DNA technology to find out if 
particular people have genes for hereditary diseases? Should 
such tests always be voluntary, or are there circumstances 
when genetic testing should be mandatory? Should insur-
ance companies or employers have access to the informa-
tion, as they do for many other types of personal health 
data? These questions are becoming much more urgent as 
the sequencing of individual genomes becomes quicker 
and!cheaper.
Ethical issues raised by such questions have as much to 
do with politics, economics, and cultural values as with sci-
ence and technology. All citizens—not only professional 
scientists—have a responsibility to be informed about how 
science works and about the potential benefits and risks 
of technology. The relationship between science, technol-
ogy, and society increases the significance and value of any 
 b i o l o g y  c o u r s e .
Clemente Aguirre-Jarquin
Lynn DeJac
Michael MortonJohn White
. Figure 1.26 DNA technology and forensics. Since 1992, the 
Innocence Project has used forensic analysis of DNA samples from 
crime scenes to exonerate over 360 wrongly convicted prisoners. 
Most had served many years in prison. To read about the four 
people shown here who were found to be innocent, go to the 
Innocence Project website.
CONCEPT CHECK 1.4
1. How does science differ from technology?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS The gene that causes sickle-cell 
disease is present in a higher percentage of residents of sub-
Saharan Africa than among those of African descent living in 
the United States. Even though this gene causes sickle-cell dis-
ease, it also provides some protection from malaria, a serious 
disease that is widespread in sub-Saharan Africa but absent in 
the United States. Discuss an evolutionary process that could 
account for the different percentages of the sickle-cell gene 
among residents of the two regions. (See Concept 1.2.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   72 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 74 ===

 CHAPTER 1  Biology and Its Themes 73
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the!Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
Interactions Theme: From Molecules to Ecosystems, 
Interactions Are Important in Biological Systems
• In feedback regulation, a pro-
cess is regulated by its output or end 
product. In negative feedback, accu-
mulation of the end product slows 
its production. In positive feedback, 
an end product speeds up its own 
production.
• Organisms interact continuously with 
physical factors. Plants take up nutri-
ents from the soil and chemicals from 
the air and use energy from the sun.
? Thinking about the muscles and nerves in your hand, how does the 
activity of text messaging reflect the four unifying themes of biology 
described in this section?
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
1 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 1.1
The study of life reveals unifying themes (pp. 51–59)
Organization Theme: New Properties Emerge at Successive 
Levels of Biological Organization
• The hierarchy of life unfolds as follows: 
 b i o s p h e r e  7 ecosystem 7 community 7 
population 7 organism 7 organ system 7 
organ 7 tissue 7 cell 7 organelle 7 molecule 
7 atom. With each step from atoms to the 
biosphere, new emergent properties re-
sult from interactions among components 
at the lower levels. In an approach called 
reductionism, complex systems are broken down to simpler 
components that are!more manageable to study. In systems 
biology, scientists attempt to model the dynamic behavior of 
whole biological!systems by studying the interactions among 
the system’s!parts.
• Structure and function are correlated at all levels of biologi-
cal organization. The cell, an organism’s basic unit of structure 
and function, is the lowest level that can perform all activi-
ties required for life. Cells are either prokaryotic or eukaryotic. 
Eukaryotic cells have a DNA-containing nucleus and other 
membrane- enclosed organelles. Prokaryotic cells lack such 
organelles.
Information Theme: Life’s Processes Involve the 
Expression and Transmission of Genetic Information
• Genetic information is encoded in the 
nucleotide sequences of DNA. It is DNA 
that transmits heritable information 
from parents to offspring. DNA sequences 
(called genes) program a cell’s protein pro-
duction by being transcribed into mRNA 
and then translated into specific proteins, 
a process called gene expression. Gene 
expression also produces RNAs that are 
not translated into protein but serve other 
important functions. Genomics is the 
large-scale analysis of the DNA sequences 
of a species (its genome) as well as the 
comparison of genomes between species. 
Bioinformatics uses computational 
tools to deal with huge volumes of se-
quence data.
Energy and Matter Theme: Life Requires the Transfer and 
Transformation of Energy and Matter
• Energy flows through an 
ecosystem. All organisms 
must perform work, which 
requires energy. Producers 
convert energy from sunlight 
to chemical energy, some of 
which is used by them and by 
consumers to do work, and 
is eventually lost from the 
ecosystem as heat. Chemicals 
cycle between organisms and 
the environment.
                     CHEMICAL CYCLING
ENERGY FLOW
CONCEPT 1.2
The Core Theme: Evolution accounts for the unity and 
diversity of life (pp. 59–64)
• Evolution, the process of change that has 
transformed life on Earth, accounts for the 
unity and diversity of life. It also explains 
evolutionary adaptation—the match of or-
ganisms to their environments.
• Biologists classify species according to a sys-
tem of broader and broader groups. Domain Bacteria and domain 
Archaea consist of prokaryotes. Domain Eukarya, the eukaryotes, 
includes various groups of protists and the kingdoms Plantae, Fungi, 
and Animalia. As diverse as life is, there is also evidence of remark-
able unity, revealed in the similarities between different species.
• Darwin proposed natural selection as the mechanism for 
evolutionary adaptation of populations to their environments. 
Natural selection is the evolutionary process that occurs when a 
population is exposed to environmental factors that consistently 
cause individuals with certain heritable traits to have greater re-
productive success than do individuals with other heritable traits.
Population of organisms
Environmental
factors
Hereditary
variations
Overproduction of off-
spring and competition
Differences in reproductive success
of individuals
Evolution of adaptations in the population
• Each species is one twig of a branching tree of life extending back 
in time through more and more remote ancestral species. All of 
life is connected through its long evolutionary history.
? How could natural selection have led to the evolution of adaptations 
such as camouflaging coat color in beach mice?
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   73 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 75 ===

74 CHAPTER 1 Biology and Its Themes
8. DRAW IT Draw a biological hierarchy similar to the one in 
Figure 1.3 but using a coral reef as the ecosystem, a fish as the 
organism, its stomach as the organ, and DNA as the molecule. 
Include all levels in the hierarchy.
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION A typical prokaryotic cell has 
about 3,000 genes in its DNA, while a human cell has about 
21,300 genes. About 1,000 of these genes are present in both 
types of cells. Explain how such different organisms could have 
this same subset of 1,000 genes. What sorts of functions might 
these shared genes have?
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Based on the results of the mouse 
coloration case study, suggest another hypothesis researchers 
might use to study the role of predators in natural selection.
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Scientists search the scientific 
literature using electronic databases such as PubMed, a free 
online database maintained by the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information. Use PubMed to find the abstract 
of an article that Hopi Hoekstra published in 2017 or later.
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: EVOLUTION In a short essay 
(100–150 words), discuss Darwin’s view of how natural 
selection resulted in both unity and diversity of life. Include 
in your discussion some of his evidence. (For help in writing 
essays, see “Writing Tips and Rubrics” in the Study Area of 
Mastering Biology under “Additional Resources.”)
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Can you pick out the mossy leaf-
tailed gecko lying against the tree 
trunk in this photo? How is the 
appearance of the gecko a benefit in 
terms of survival? Given what you 
learned about evolution, natural 
selection, and genetic information 
in this chapter, describe how the 
gecko’s coloration might have 
evolved.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
In studying nature, scientists form and test hypotheses 
(pp. 64–70)
• In scientific inquiry, scientists collect data and use inductive 
reasoning to draw a general conclusion, which can be devel-
oped into a testable hypothesis. Deductive reasoning uses 
predictions to test hypotheses. Hypotheses must be testable; 
science can address neither the possibility of supernatural phe-
nomena nor religious beliefs. Hypotheses can be tested by con-
ducting experiments or, when that is not possible, by making 
observations. In the process of science, the core activity is testing 
ideas. This endeavor is influenced by exploration and discovery, 
community analysis and feedback, and societal outcomes.
• Controlled experiments are designed to demonstrate 
the effect of one variable by testing control groups and 
experimental groups that differ in only that one variable.
• A scientific theory is broad in scope, generates new hypotheses, 
and is supported by a large body of evidence.
? What are the roles of gathering and interpreting data?
CONCEPT 1.3
CONCEPT 1.4
Science benefits from a cooperative approach and 
diverse viewpoints (pp. 70–72)
• Science is a social activity. The work of each scientist builds on 
the work of others who have come before. Scientists must be 
able to repeat each other’s results, and integrity is key. Biologists 
approach questions at different levels; their approaches comple-
ment each other.
• T echnology consists of any method or device that applies scien-
tific knowledge for some specific purpose that affects society. The 
impact of basic research is not always immediately obvious.
• Diversity among scientists promotes progress in science.
? Explain why different approaches and diverse backgrounds among 
scientists are important.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C01_PRF.indd   74 3/21/20   12:38 AM

=== SIDE 76 ===

 75
THE ROLE OF CHEMISTRY  
IN BIOLOGY
Unit 1 
What got you interested in biology?
I was always cerebral, I always liked to 
read and think. For me, role models were 
important. At that time, I knew about 
only two professions that blacks were in: 
medicine and teaching. There was one 
black physician in town—unusual for a 
rural town. My high school principal—he 
was black—would tell us, “By golly, you 
could be anything you want to be!” I paid 
attention and listened. He helped me ap-
ply to Knoxville College, and I decided I 
would be a physician, so I majored in biol-
ogy and minored in chemistry. Then, in my 
senior year, my professor at Knoxville—he 
was interested in diversity—got me into 
a research program at the University of 
Tennessee, which was not integrated at 
that time—blacks couldn’t attend. But I 
was allowed to do research on tapeworms, 
irradiate them and examine their chromo-
somes, and I was allowed to attend the 
seminars. I was fascinated by the research, 
I was just turned on—finally, I realized this 
is what I’d really like to do.
Can you tell me about how you got 
into cancer research?
After my Ph.D. and my postdoctoral re-
search at Harvard, I realized I wanted to 
work on animal cells, so I joined Ira Pastan’s 
group at the National Cancer Institute at 
the National Institutes of Health, where I 
eventually got my own lab. Together with 
Ken Yamada, I was working on a protein 
called fibronectin, which was present on 
the outside surface of normal cells but not 
cancer cells. Fibronectin is a glycoprotein—it 
has carbohydrates (sugars) attached to it. 
At the time, there was a hypothesis that 
the carbohydrates were necessary for fibro-
nectin to be exported from the cell, and we 
decided to test that hypothesis using a drug 
called tunicamycin that prevented carbohy-
drate attachment. We 
showed that carbo-
hydrates weren’t 
necessary for export, 
but instead they 
were important for 
stabilizing the pro-
tein’s structure. That 
turned out to be one of 
the most cited papers for 
1978; it was huge.
In 1991, you became Director of the 
National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences. What were your 
goals and accomplishments there?
When I interviewed for the position, I told 
the Director of the NIH, “My first priority 
would be to make the Institute responsive 
to the needs of the American people.” 
She immediately offered me the job—and 
that changed my life. It gave me the op-
portunity to think big and to address 
a lot of issues I felt weren’t being dealt 
with, kind of what I’d been dreaming of. 
Environmental health research at that time 
focused on chemical carcinogenesis, and I 
wanted to expand that focus to social and 
behavioral issues also, as well as genetics. 
Over my time there, I engaged communi-
ties in identifying areas of concern for our 
research, such as disproportionate expo-
sure to chemicals in certain neighborhoods. 
I founded the Environmental Genome 
Project, which used a novel genomic ap-
proach to determine susceptibility to tox-
ins. I also expanded Environmental Health 
Centers around the country, developing 
the Breast Cancer and the Environment 
Research Program and Children’s 
Environmental Health and Disease 
Prevention Research Centers. Children are 
really important to me—they are especially 
susceptible to environmental toxins, and 
we needed to address that.
What is your advice 
to an undergraduate 
considering a career  
in biology?
Most people, I think, will 
figure out what is the right 
thing to do, but often it takes a 
lot of courage to do the right thing. When 
I accepted the Sackler Prize, I talked about 
walking to high school and realizing that 
government was making a lot of decisions 
that affected rural America without ever 
bothering to consult rural Americans. In 
order to change that, one of us from rural 
America had to make it—and I thought, 
“Why not me?” In being awarded the 
prize, for creating community-based par-
ticipatory research, it looks like I actually 
succeeded in what I set out to do: to get 
the public health decision-makers to pay 
attention to the needs of the poor.
Dr. Kenneth Olden recently retired from a long 
and distinguished career in medical research and 
public health, including serving as Director of 
the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences from 1991 to 2005, as founding Dean of 
the School of Public Health at the City University 
of New York from 2008 to 2012, and as Director of 
the National Center for Environmental Assessment 
from 2012 to 2016. He has published over 220 
research papers and has received many honors and 
awards, among them the three most distinguished 
awards in public health. Dr. Olden grew up in 
Parrottsville, Tennessee, the son of a sharecrop-
per. He remembers walking up a long hill to high 
school every morning and daydreaming about 
helping the poor people—both black and white—
in the neighborhoods he’d walk through, wanting 
to make a difference.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Kenneth Olden
“One of us from rural 
America had to make  
it—and I thought,  
'Why not me?'”
. Dr. Olden established Children’s 
Environmental Health and Disease 
Prevention Research Centers.
URRY1637_12_GE_U01_PRF.indd   75 3/21/20   3:57 AM

=== SIDE 77 ===

Figure 2.1 Wood ants (Formica rufa) use chemistry to ward off enemies. When 
threatened from above, they shoot volleys of formic acid from their abdomens into 
the air. The acid bombards and stings potential predators, such as hungry birds.
Atoms and Molecules
 2.1 Matter consists of chemical elements 
in pure form and in combinations 
called compounds p. 77
 2.2 An element’s properties depend on 
the structure of its atoms p. 78
 2.3 The formation and function of 
molecules and ionic compounds 
depend on chemical bonding 
between atoms p. 84
 2.4 Chemical reactions make and break 
chemical bonds p. 88
KEY CONCEPTS
2
+
+
What determines the properties of
a compound such as formic acid?
A compound is made of atoms
joined by bonds. Formic acid (CH2O2) 
consists of carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and 
oxygen (O).
The number of protons (    ) determines
an atom’s identity. Oxygen has 8 protons.
An atom’s electron (   ) distribution 
determines its ability to form bonds. 
Oxygen has space for 2 more electrons,
so it can form 2 bonds.
In formic acid, this O attracts H’s electron, releasing H+ 
and making this compound an acid, which stings.
A compound’s properties depend on its 
atoms and how they are bonded together.
–
–
–
––
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
C H
H
O
O
C H
H
O
O
C
H
O
O
H+
–
Formic acid
Oxygen
atom
Study Tip
Make a table: As you read the chapter, 
make a summary table like the following. 
Add more rows as you proceed.
Element (atom)
Property
Atomic
number
# Electrons
# Neutrons
Mass
number
Electron
distribution
diagram
# Valence
electrons
CHON
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 2
• Figure 2.6 Walkthrough: Energy Levels 
of an Atom’s Electrons
• Animation: Introduction to Chemical 
Bonds
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Chemistry Review: Atoms and Molecules: 
Covalent Bonds
• Chemistry Review: Atoms and Molecules: 
Electronegativity
76
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   76 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 78 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 77
Just four elements—oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), 
and nitrogen (N)—make up approximately 96% of living mat-
ter. Calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), sulfur (S), 
and a few other elements account for most of the remaining 
4% or so of an organism’s mass. Trace elements are required 
by an organism in only minute quantities. Some trace ele-
ments, such as iron (Fe), are needed by all forms of life; others 
are required only by certain species. For example, in verte-
brates (animals with backbones), the element iodine (I) is an 
essential ingredient of a hormone produced by the thyroid 
gland. A daily intake of only 0.15 milligram (mg) of iodine 
is adequate for normal activity of the human thyroid. An 
iodine deficiency in the diet causes the thyroid gland to grow 
to abnormal size, a condition called goiter. Consuming sea-
food or iodized salt reduces the incidence of goiter. Relative 
amounts of all the elements in the human body are listed 
in!Table 2.1.
Some naturally occurring elements are toxic to organisms. 
In humans, for instance, the element arsenic has been linked 
to numerous diseases and can be lethal. In some areas of the 
world, arsenic occurs naturally and can make its way into the 
groundwater. As a result of using water from drilled wells in 
southern Asia, millions of people have been inadvertently 
exposed to arsenic-laden water. Efforts are under way to reduce 
arsenic levels in their water supply.
Matter consists of chemical 
elements in pure form and in 
combinations called compounds
Organisms are composed of matter, which is anything that 
takes up space and has mass. Matter exists in many forms. 
Rocks, metals, oils, gases, and living organisms are a!few exam-
ples of what seems to be an endless assortment of!matter.
Elements and Compounds
Matter is made up of elements. An element is a substance 
that cannot be broken down to other substances by chemical 
reactions. Today, chemists recognize 92 elements occurring in 
nature; gold, copper, carbon, and oxygen are examples. Each 
element has a symbol, usually the first letter or two of its name. 
Some symbols are derived from Latin or German; for instance, 
the symbol for sodium is Na, from the Latin word natrium.
A compound is a substance consisting of two or more 
different elements combined in a fixed ratio. Table salt, for 
example, is sodium chloride (NaCl), a compound composed 
of the elements sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) in a 1:1 ratio. 
Pure sodium is a metal, and pure chlorine is a poisonous gas. 
When chemically combined, however, sodium and chlorine 
form an edible compound. Water (H2O), another compound, 
consists of the elements hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O) in 
a 2:1 ratio. These are simple examples of organized matter 
having emergent properties: A compound has characteristics 
different from those of its elements (Figure 2.2).
The Elements of Life
Of the 92 natural elements, about 20–25% are essential 
elements that an organism needs to live a healthy life and 
reproduce. The essential elements are similar among organ-
isms, but there is some variation—for example, humans need 
25 elements, but plants need only 17.
CONCEPT 2.1
Na
Sodium
+
+
Cl
Chlorine (gas)
NaCl
Sodium chloride
. Figure 2.2 The emergent properties of a compound. The 
metal sodium combines with the poisonous gas chlorine, forming 
the edible compound sodium chloride, or table salt.
u
Table 2.1 Elements in the Human Body
Element Symbol
Percentage of Body Mass 
(including water)
Oxygen O 65.0%
96.3%
Carbon C 18.5%
Hydrogen H     9.5%
Nitrogen N     3.3%
Calcium Ca     1.5%
    
3.7%
Phosphorus P     1.0%
Potassium K     0.4%
Sulfur S     0.3%
Sodium Na     0.2%
Chlorine Cl     0.2%
Magnesium Mg     0.1%
Trace elements (less than 0.01% of mass): Boron (B), chromium (Cr), 
cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), fluorine (F), iodine (I), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), 
molybdenum (Mo), selenium (Se), silicon (Si), tin (Sn), vanadium (V), zinc (Zn)
INTERPRET THE DATA Given the makeup of the human body, what 
compound do you think accounts for the high percentage of oxygen?
u
u
  Mastering Biology Interview with Kenneth Olden: 
Assessing susceptibility to environmental toxins 
using genomics
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   77 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 79 ===

78 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
(a) (b)
––
Cloud of negative
charge (2 electrons)
This model represents the
two electrons as a cloud of
negative charge, a result of 
their motion around the nucleus.
In this more simpliƂed Oodel, 
the electrons are shown 
as two small yellow spheres 
on a circle around the nucleus.
Nucleus
Electrons
+
+
+
+
. Figure 2.4 Simplified models of a helium (He) atom. The 
helium nucleus consists of 2 neutrons (brown) and 2 protons (pink). 
Two electrons (yellow) exist outside the nucleus. These models are 
not to scale; they greatly overestimate the size of the nucleus in 
relation to the electron cloud.
Case Study: Evolution of Tolerance 
to Toxic Elements
EVOLUTION Some species have become adapted to environ-
ments containing elements that are usually toxic; an example 
is serpentine plant communities. Serpentine is a jade-like 
mineral that contains elevated concentrations of elements 
such as chromium, nickel, and cobalt. Although most plants 
cannot survive in soil that forms from serpentine rock, a 
small number of plant species have adaptations that allow 
them to do so (Figure 2.3). Presumably, variants of ancestral, 
nonserpentine species arose that could survive in serpentine 
soils, and subsequent natural selection resulted in the distinc-
tive array of species we see in these areas today. Serpentine-
adapted plants are of great interest to researchers because 
studying them can teach us so much about natural selection 
and evolutionary adaptations on a local scale.
. Figure 2.3 Serpentine plant community. These plants are 
growing on serpentine soil, which contains elements that are 
usually toxic to plants. The insets show a close-up of serpentine 
rock and one of the plants, a Tiburon Mariposa lily (Calochortus 
tiburonensis). This specially adapted species is found only on this 
one hill in Tiburon, a peninsula that juts into San Francisco Bay.
CONCEPT 2.2
An element’s properties depend 
on the structure of its atoms
Each element consists of a certain type of atom that is 
different from the atoms of any other element. An atom is 
the smallest unit of matter that still retains the properties 
of an element. Atoms are so small that it would take about a 
million of them to stretch across the period printed at the end 
of this sentence. We symbolize atoms with the same abbrevia-
tion used for the element that is made up of those atoms. For 
example, the symbol C stands for both the element carbon 
and a single carbon atom.
Subatomic Particles
Although the atom is the smallest unit having the properties 
of an element, these tiny bits of matter are composed of even 
smaller parts, called subatomic particles. Using high-energy 
collisions, physicists have produced more than 100 types of 
particles from the atom, but only three kinds of particles are 
relevant here: neutrons, protons, and electrons. Protons 
and electrons are electrically charged. Each proton has one unit 
of positive charge, and each electron has one unit of negative 
charge. A neutron, as its name implies, is electrically neutral.
Protons and neutrons are packed together tightly in a 
dense core, or atomic nucleus, at the center of an atom; 
protons give the nucleus a positive charge. The rapidly 
moving electrons form a “cloud” of negative charge around 
the nucleus, and it is the attraction between opposite charges 
that keeps the electrons in the vicinity of the nucleus. 
Figure 2.4 shows two commonly used models of the structure 
of the helium atom as an example.
CONCEPT CHECK 2.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how table salt has emergent 
properties. (See Concept 1.1.)
2. Is a trace element an essential element? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? In humans, potassium helps to regulate the acid–
base balance in blood and tissues. It also plays a key role in 
the transmission of neural signals, resulting in the contrac-
tion of skeletal and smooth muscles. What might be the 
effects of a potassium deficiency?
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how natural selection might 
have played a role in the evolution of species that are toler-
ant of serpentine soils. (Review Concept 1.2.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   78 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 80 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 79
1!dalton, so the mass number is close to, but slightly 
different from, the total mass of an atom, called its atomic 
mass. For example, the mass number of sodium (23
11Na) is 
23, but its!atomic mass is 22.9898 daltons; the difference is 
explained!below.
The neutron and proton are almost identical in mass, each 
about 1.7*10-24 gram (g). Grams and other conventional 
units are not very useful for describing the mass of objects 
that are so minuscule. Thus, for atoms and subatomic par-
ticles (and for molecules, too), we use a unit of measurement 
called the dalton, in honor of John Dalton, the British sci-
entist who helped develop atomic theory around 1800. (The 
dalton is the same as the atomic mass unit, or amu, a unit you 
may have encountered elsewhere.) Neutrons and protons 
have masses close to 1 dalton. Because the mass of an elec-
tron is only about 1/2,000 that of a neutron or proton, we 
can ignore electrons when computing the total mass of an 
atom.
Atomic Number and Atomic Mass
Atoms of the various elements differ in their number of sub-
atomic particles. All atoms of a particular element have the 
same number of protons in their nuclei. This number of pro-
tons, which is unique to that element, is called the atomic 
number and is written as a subscript to the left of the symbol 
for the element. The abbreviation 2He, for example, tells 
us that an atom of the element helium has 2 protons in its 
nucleus. Unless otherwise indicated, an atom is neutral in 
electrical charge, which means that its protons must be bal-
anced by an equal number of electrons. Therefore, the atomic 
number tells us the number of protons and also the number 
of electrons in an electrically neutral atom.
We can deduce the number of neutrons from a second 
quantity, the mass number, which is the total number of 
protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. The mass 
number is written as a superscript to the left of an element’s 
symbol. For example, we can use this shorthand to write an 
atom of helium as 4
2He. Because the atomic number indicates 
how many protons there are, we can determine the num-
ber of neutrons by subtracting the atomic number from the 
mass number. In our example, the helium atom 4
2He has 
2!neutrons. For sodium (Na):
  Mastering Biology Animation: Atomic Number and  
Atomic Mass
Isotopes
All atoms of a given element have the same number of 
protons, but some atoms have more neutrons than other 
atoms of the same element and therefore have greater mass. 
These different atomic forms of the same element are called 
isotopes of the element. In nature, an element may occur as 
a mixture of its isotopes. As an example, the element carbon, 
which has the atomic number 6, has three naturally occurring 
isotopes. The most common isotope is carbon-12, 12
  6C, which 
accounts for about 99% of the carbon in nature. The isotope 
12
  6C has 6 neutrons. Most of the remaining 1% of carbon 
consists of atoms of the isotope 13
  6C, with 7 neutrons. A third, 
even rarer isotope, 14
  6C, has 8 neutrons. Notice that all three 
isotopes of carbon have 6 protons; otherwise, they would not 
be carbon. Although the isotopes of an element have slightly 
different masses, they behave identically in chemical reac-
tions. (For an element with more than one naturally occur-
ring isotope, the atomic mass is an average of those isotopes, 
weighted by their abundance. Thus, carbon has an atomic 
mass of 12.01 daltons.)
Both 12C and 13C are stable isotopes, meaning that their 
nuclei do not have a tendency to lose subatomic particles, a 
process called decay. The isotope 14C, however, is unstable, 
or radioactive. A radioactive isotope is one in which 
the nucleus decays spontaneously, giving off particles and 
energy. When the radioactive decay leads to a change in the 
number of protons, it transforms the atom to an atom of a 
different element. For example, when a carbon-14 (14C) atom 
decays, a neutron decays into a proton, transforming the 
atom into a nitrogen (14N) atom. Radioactive isotopes have 
many useful applications in biology.
Radioactive Tracers
Radioactive isotopes are often used as diagnostic tools in 
medicine. Cells can use radioactive atoms just as they would 
use nonradioactive isotopes of the same element. The radio-
active isotopes are incorporated into biologically active 
molecules, which are then used as tracers to track atoms dur-
ing metabolism, the chemical processes of an organism. For 
example, certain kidney disorders are diagnosed by inject-
ing small doses of radioactively labeled substances into the 
blood and then analyzing the tracer molecules excreted in the 
urine. Radioactive tracers are also used in combination with 
sophisticated imaging instruments, such as PET scanners that 
Mass number5 number of protons 1 neutrons
5 23 for sodium
Na23
11
Atomic number5 number of protons
5 number of electrons in a neutral atom
5 1 1 for sodium
Number of neutrons5 mass number 2 atomic number
5 23 2 1 1 5 12 for sodium
The simplest atom is hydrogen 1
1H, which has no neutrons; 
it consists of a single proton with a single electron.
Because the contribution of electrons to mass is negligible,  
almost all of an atom’s mass is concentrated in its nucleus. 
Neutrons and protons each have a mass very close to 
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   79 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 81 ===

80 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
can monitor growth and metabolism of cancers in the body 
(Figure 2.5).
Although radioactive isotopes are very useful in biological 
research and medicine, radiation from decaying isotopes also 
poses a hazard to life by damaging cellular molecules. The 
severity of this damage depends on the type and amount of 
radiation an organism absorbs. One of the most serious envi-
ronmental threats is radioactive fallout from nuclear acci-
dents. The doses of most isotopes used in medical diagnosis, 
however, are relatively safe.
Radiometric Dating
EVOLUTION Researchers measure radioactive decay in fos-
sils to date these relics of past life. Fossils provide a large body 
of evidence for evolution, documenting differences between 
organisms from the past and those living at present and giv-
ing us insight into species that have disappeared over time. 
While the layering of fossil beds establishes that deeper fossils 
are older than more shallow ones, the actual age (in years) 
of the fossils in each layer cannot be determined by position 
alone. This is where radioactive isotopes come in.
A “parent” isotope decays into its “daughter” isotope at a 
fixed rate, expressed as the half-life of the isotope—the time 
it takes for 50% of the parent isotope to decay. Each radioac-
tive isotope has a characteristic half-life that is not affected 
by temperature, pressure, or any other environmental vari-
able. Using a process called radiometric dating, scientists 
measure the ratio of different isotopes and calculate how 
many half-lives (in years) have passed since an organism was 
fossilized or a rock was formed. Half-life values range from 
very short for some isotopes, measured in seconds or days, 
to extremely long—uranium-238 has a half-life of 4.5 billion 
years! Each isotope can best “measure” a particular range 
of years: Uranium-238 was used to determine that moon 
rocks are approximately 4.5 billion years old, similar to the 
estimated age of Earth. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you 
can work with data from an experiment that used carbon-14 
to determine the age of an important fossil. (Figure 25.6 
explains more about radiometric dating of fossils.)
Cancerous
throat
tissue
c Figure 2.5 A PET 
scan, a medical 
use for radioactive 
isotopes. PET, an 
acronym for positron-
emission tomography, 
detects locations of 
intense chemical activity 
in the body. The bright 
yellow spot marks an 
area with an elevated 
level of radioactively 
labeled glucose, which 
in turn indicates high 
metabolic activity, a 
hallmark of cancerous 
tissue.
The Energy Levels of Electrons
The simplified models of the atom in Figure 2.4 greatly exag-
gerate the size of the nucleus relative to that of the whole 
atom. If an atom of helium were the size of a typical football 
stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a pencil eraser in 
the center of the field. Moreover, the electrons would be like 
two tiny gnats buzzing around the stadium. Atoms are mostly 
empty space. When two atoms approach each other during a 
chemical reaction, their nuclei do not come close enough to 
interact. Of the three subatomic particles we have discussed, 
only electrons are directly involved in chemical reactions.
An atom’s electrons vary in the amount of energy they pos-
sess. Energy is defined as the capacity to cause change—for 
instance, by doing work. Potential energy is the energy that 
matter possesses because of its location or structure. For exam-
ple, water in a reservoir on a hill has potential energy because 
of its altitude. When the gates of the reservoir’s dam are 
opened and the water runs downhill, the energy can be used 
to do work, such as moving the blades of turbines to generate 
electricity. Because energy has been expended, the water has 
less energy at the bottom of the hill than it did in the reser-
voir. Matter has a natural tendency to move toward the lowest 
possible state of potential energy; in our example, the water 
runs downhill. To restore the potential energy of a reservoir, 
work must be done to elevate the water against gravity.
The electrons of an atom have potential energy due to their 
distance from the nucleus (Figure 2.6). The negatively charged 
electrons are attracted to the positively charged nucleus. 
Atomic
nucleus
Third shell (highest energy 
level in this model)
Second shell (higher 
energy level)
First shell (lowest energy 
level)
Energy
absorbed
Energy
lost
(a) A ball bouncing down a flight
of stairs can come to rest only
on each step, not between steps.
Similarly, an electron can exist 
only at certain energy levels, not
between levels.
(b) An electron can move from one shell to another only if the energy
it gains or loses is exactly equal to the difference in energy between
the energy levels of the two shells. Arrows in this model indicate 
some of the stepwise changes in potential energy that are possible.
. Figure 2.6 Energy levels of an atom’s electrons. Electrons 
exist only at fixed levels of potential energy called electron shells.
 Mastering Biology F i g u r e  W a l k t h r o u g h
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   80 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 82 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 81
Scientific Skills Exercise
Calibrating a Standard Radioactive Isotope Decay 
Curve and Interpreting Data
 1.0
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
02 13579 4 6 8 10
Time before present (half-lives)
Fraction of isotope remaining in fossil
c  Neanderthal 
fossils
Data from R. Pinhasi et al., Revised age of late Neanderthal occupation and the 
end of the Middle Paleolithic in the northern Caucasus, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 147:8611–8616 (2011). doi 10.1073/pnas.1018938108
How Long Might Neanderthals Have Co-Existed with Modern 
Humans (Homo sapiens)? Neanderthals (Homo neanderthal-
ensis) were living in Europe by 350,000 years ago and may have 
coexisted with early Homo sapiens in parts of Eurasia for hun-
dreds or thousands of years before Neanderthals became extinct. 
Researchers sought to more accurately determine the extent of 
their overlap by pinning down the latest date Neanderthals still 
lived in the area. They used carbon-14 dating to determine the age 
of a Neanderthal fossil from the most recent (uppermost) archeo-
logical layer containing Neanderthal bones. In this exercise you will 
calibrate a standard carbon-14 decay curve and use it to determine 
the age of this Neanderthal fossil. The age will help you approxi-
mate the last time the two species may have coexisted at the site 
where this fossil was collected.
How the Experiment Was Done Carbon-14 (14C) is a radioactive 
isotope of carbon that decays to 14N at a constant rate. 14C is pres-
ent in the atmosphere in small amounts at a constant ratio with 
both 13C and 12C, two other isotopes of carbon. When carbon is 
taken up from the atmosphere by a plant during photosynthesis, 
12C, 13C, and 14C isotopes are incorporated into the plant in the 
same proportions in which they were present in the atmosphere. 
These proportions remain the same in the tissues of an animal that 
eats the plant. While an organism is alive, the 14C in its body con-
stantly decays to 14N but is constantly replaced by new carbon from 
the environment. Once an organism dies, it stops taking in new 
14C but the 14C in its tissues continues to decay, while the 12C in its 
tissues remains the same because it is not radioactive and does not 
decay. Thus, scientists can calculate how long the pool of original 
14C has been decaying in a fossil by measuring the ratio of 14C to 12C 
and comparing it to the ratio of 14C to 12C present originally in the 
atmosphere. The fraction of 14C in a fossil compared to the original 
fraction of 14C can be converted to years because we know that the 
half-life of 14C is 5,730 years—in other words, half of the 14C in a 
fossil decays every 5,730 years.
Data from the Experiment The researchers found that the 
Neanderthal fossil had approximately 0.0078 (or, in scientific no-
tation, 7.8 * 10-3) as much 14C as the atmosphere. The following 
questions will guide you through translating this fraction into 
the age of the fossil.
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. The graph shows a standard curve of radioactive isotope 
decay. The line shows the fraction of the radioactive isotope 
over time (before the present) in units of half-lives. Recall that 
a half-life is the amount of time it takes for half of the radioac-
tive isotope to decay. Labeling each data point with the corre-
sponding fractions will help orient you to this graph. Draw an 
arrow to the data point for half-life = 1 and write the fraction 
of 14C that will remain after one half-life. Calculate the frac-
tion of 14C remaining at each half-life and write the fractions 
on the graph near arrows pointing to the data points. Convert 
each fraction to a decimal number and round off to a maxi-
mum of three significant digits (zeros at the beginning of the 
number do not count as significant digits). Also write each 
decimal number in scientific notation.
2. Recall that 14C has a half-life of 5,730 years. To calibrate the x-axis 
for 14C decay, write the time before present in years below each 
half-life.
3. The researchers found that the Neanderthal fossil had ap-
proximately 0.0078 as much 14C as found originally in the 
atmosphere. (a) Using the numbers on your graph, determine 
how many half-lives have passed since the Neanderthal died. 
(b) Using your 14C calibration on the x-axis, what is the approx-
imate age of the Neanderthal fossil in years (round off to the 
nearest thousand)? (c) Approximately when did Neanderthals 
become extinct according to this study? (d) The researchers 
cite evidence that modern humans (H. sapiens) became estab-
lished in the same region as the last Neanderthals approxi-
mately 39,000–42,000 years ago. What does this suggest about 
possible overlap of Neanderthals and modern humans?
4. Carbon-14 dating works for fossils up to about 75,000 years 
old; fossils older than that contain too little 14C to be detected. 
Most dinosaurs went extinct 65.5 million years ago. (a) Can 
14C be used to date dinosaur bones? Explain. (b) Radioactive 
uranium-235 has a half-life of 704 million years. If it was 
incorporated into dinosaur bones, could it be used to date 
the!dinosaur fossils? Explain.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
It takes work to move a given electron farther away from 
the nucleus, so the more distant an electron is from the 
nucleus, the greater its potential energy. Unlike the continu-
ous flow of!water downhill, changes in the potential energy 
of electrons can occur only in steps of fixed amounts. An 
electron having a certain amount of energy is something 
like a ball on a staircase (see Figure 2.6a). The ball can have 
different amounts of potential energy, depending on which 
step it is on, but it cannot spend much time between the steps. 
Similarly, an electron’s potential energy is determined by 
its energy level. An electron!can exist only at certain energy 
levels, not between them.
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   81 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 83 ===

82 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Electron Distribution and Chemical Properties
The chemical behavior of an atom is determined by the dis-
tribution of electrons in the atom’s electron shells. Beginning 
with hydrogen, the simplest atom, we can imagine build-
ing the atoms of the other elements by adding 1 proton and 
1 electron at a time (along with an appropriate number of 
neutrons). Figure 2.7, a modified version of what is called 
the periodic table of the elements, shows this distribution of 
electrons for the first 18 elements, from hydrogen (1H) to 
argon (18Ar). The elements are arranged in three rows, or 
periods, corresponding to the number of electron shells in their 
atoms. The left-to-right sequence of elements in each row cor-
responds to the sequential addition of electrons and protons. 
(See the complete periodic table at the back of the book.)
Hydrogen’s 1 electron and helium’s 2 electrons are located 
in the first shell. Electrons, like all matter, tend to exist in the 
lowest available state of potential energy. In an atom, this 
state is in the first shell. However, the first shell can hold no 
more than 2 electrons; thus, hydrogen and helium are the 
An electron’s energy level is correlated with its average 
distance from the nucleus. Electrons are found in different 
electron shells, each with a characteristic average distance 
and energy level. In diagrams, shells can be represented by 
concentric circles, as they are in Figure 2.6b. The first shell is 
closest to the nucleus, and electrons in this shell have the low-
est potential energy. Electrons in the second shell have more 
energy, and electrons in the third shell even more energy. 
An electron can move from one shell to another, but only by 
absorbing or losing an amount of energy equal to the differ-
ence in potential energy between its position in the old shell 
and that in the new shell. When an electron absorbs energy, 
it moves to a shell farther out from the nucleus. For example, 
light energy can excite an electron to a higher energy level. 
(Indeed, this is the first step taken when plants harness the 
energy of sunlight for photosynthesis, the process that pro-
duces food from carbon dioxide and water.) When an electron 
loses energy, it “falls back” to a shell closer to the nucleus, 
and the lost energy is usually released to the environment as 
visible light or ultraviolet radiation.
Hydrogen
1H
Helium
2He
Atomic number
Neon
10Ne
Fluorine
9F
Oxygen
8O
Nitrogen
7N
Carbon
6C
Boron
5B
Beryllium
4Be
Lithium
3Li
Argon
18Ar
Chlorine
17Cl
Sulfur
16S
Phosphorus
15P
Silicon
14Si
Aluminum
13Al
Magnesium
12Mg
Sodium
11Na
First
shell
Second
shell
Third
shell
He
2
4.003 Element symbolAtomic mass
Electron 
distribution
diagram
. Figure 2.7 Electron distribution diagrams for the first 18 elements in the periodic table.  
In!a standard periodic table (see the back of the book), information for each element is presented 
as shown for helium in the inset. In the diagrams in this table, electrons are represented as yellow 
dots and electron shells as concentric circles. These diagrams are a convenient way to picture 
the distribution of an atom’s electrons among its electron shells, but these simplified models do 
not accurately represent the shape of the atom or the location of its electrons. The elements are 
arranged in rows, each representing the filling of an electron shell. As electrons are added, they 
occupy the lowest available shell.
VISUAL SKILLS What is the atomic number of magnesium? How many protons and 
electrons does it have? How many electron shells? How many valence electrons?
  Mastering Biology Animation: 
Electron Distribution Diagrams
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   82 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 84 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 83
No more than 2 electrons can occupy a single orbital. 
The first electron shell can therefore accommodate up to 
2 electrons in its s orbital. The lone electron of a hydrogen 
atom occupies the 1s orbital, as do the 2 electrons of a helium 
atom. The four orbitals of the second electron shell can hold 
up to 8 electrons, 2 in each orbital. Electrons in each of the 
four orbitals in the second shell have nearly the same energy, 
but they move in different volumes of space.
only elements in the first row of the table. In an atom with 
more than 2 electrons, the additional electrons must occupy 
higher shells because the first shell is full. The next element, 
lithium, has 3 electrons. Two of these electrons fill the first 
shell, while the third electron occupies the second shell. The 
second shell holds a maximum of 8 electrons. Neon, at the 
end of the second row, has 8 electrons in the second shell, 
giving it a total of 10 electrons.
The chemical behavior of an atom depends mostly on the 
number of electrons in its outermost shell. We call those outer 
electrons valence electrons and the outermost electron 
shell the valence shell. In the case of lithium, there is only 
1 valence electron, and the second shell is the valence shell. 
Atoms with the same number of electrons in their valence shells 
exhibit similar chemical behavior. For example, fluorine (F) 
and chlorine (Cl) both have 7 valence electrons, and both form 
compounds when combined with the element sodium (Na): 
Sodium fluoride (NaF) is commonly added to toothpaste to pre-
vent tooth decay, and, as described earlier, NaCl is table salt (see 
Figure 2.2). An atom with a completed valence shell is unreac-
tive; that is, it will not interact readily with other atoms. At the 
far right of the periodic table are helium, neon, and argon, the 
only three elements shown in Figure 2.7 that have full valence 
shells. These elements are said to be inert, meaning chemically 
unreactive. All the other atoms in Figure 2.7 are chemically 
reactive because they have incomplete valence shells.
Electron Orbitals
In the early 1900s, the electron shells of an atom were visual-
ized as concentric paths of electrons orbiting the nucleus, 
somewhat like planets orbiting the sun. It is still convenient 
to use two-dimensional concentric-circle diagrams, as in 
Figure 2.7, to symbolize three-dimensional electron shells. 
However, you need to remember that each concentric circle 
represents only the average distance between an electron in 
that shell and the nucleus. Accordingly, the concentric-circle 
diagrams do not give a real picture of an atom. In reality, 
we can never know the exact location of an electron. What 
we can do instead is describe the space in which an electron 
spends most of its time. The three-dimensional space where 
an electron is found 90% of the time is called an orbital.
Each electron shell contains electrons at a particular 
energy level, distributed among a specific number of orbitals 
of distinctive shapes and orientations. Figure 2.8 shows the 
orbitals of neon as an example, with its electron distribution 
diagram for reference. You can think of an orbital as a com-
ponent of an electron shell. The first electron shell has only 
one spherical s orbital (called 1s), but the second shell has 
four orbitals: one large spherical s orbital (called 2s) and three 
dumbbell-shaped p orbitals (called 2p orbitals). (The third 
shell and other higher electron shells also have s and p orbit-
als, as well as orbitals of more complex shapes.)
1s orbital
First shell Second shell
2s orbital
1s, 2s, and 
2p orbitals
Three 2p orbitals
Neon, with two filled 
shells (10 electrons)
First shell
Second shell
x y
z
(a)Electron distribution diagram. An electron distribution 
diagram is shown here for a neon atom, which has a total of 10 
electrons. Each concentric circle represents an electron shell, 
which can be subdivided into electron orbitals.
(b)Separate electron orbitals. The three-dimensional shapes 
represent electron orbitals—the volumes of space where the 
electrons of an atom are most likely to be found. Each orbital 
holds a maximum of 2 electrons. The first electron shell, on the 
left, has one spherical (s) orbital, designated 1s. The second 
shell, on the right, has one larger s orbital (designated 2s for 
the second shell) plus three dumbbell-shaped orbitals called 
p orbitals (2p for the second shell). The three 2p orbitals lie at 
right angles to one another along imaginary x-, y-, and z-axes 
of the atom. Each 2p orbital is outlined here in a different color.
(c)Superimposed electron orbitals. To reveal the complete 
picture of the electron orbitals of neon, we superimpose the 1s 
orbital of the first shell and the 2s and three 2p orbitals of the 
second shell.
. Figure 2.8 Electron orbitals.
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   83 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 85 ===

84 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Figure 2.10a shows several ways of representing a hydro-
gen molecule. Its molecular formula, H2, simply indicates that 
the molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen. Electron 
sharing can be depicted by an electron distribution diagram 
or by a Lewis dot structure, in which element symbols are sur-
rounded by dots that represent the valence electrons (H : H).  
We can also use a structural formula, H¬H, where the line 
represents a single bond, a pair of shared electrons. A space-
filling model comes closest to representing the actual shape of 
the molecule. (You may also be familiar with ball-and-stick 
models, which are shown in Figure 2.15.)
Oxygen has 6 electrons in its second electron shell and 
therefore needs 2 more electrons to complete its valence 
shell. Two oxygen atoms form a molecule by sharing two pairs 
of valence electrons (Figure 2.10b). The atoms are thus joined 
by what is called a double bond (O“O).
Each atom that can share valence electrons has a bonding 
capacity corresponding to the number of covalent bonds the 
atom can form. When the bonds form, they give the atom a 
full complement of electrons in the valence shell. The bonding 
capacity of oxygen, for example, is 2. This bonding capacity is 
called the atom’s valence and usually equals the number of 
electrons required to complete the atom’s outermost (valence) 
shell. See if you can determine the valences of hydrogen, oxy-
gen, nitrogen, and carbon by studying the electron distribution 
diagrams in Figure 2.7. You can see that the valence of hydro-
gen is 1; oxygen, 2; nitrogen, 3; and carbon, 4. The situation is 
more complicated for phosphorus, in the third row of the peri-
odic table, which can have a valence of 3 or 5 depending on the 
combination of single and double bonds it makes.
The reactivity of an atom arises from the presence of 
unpaired electrons in one or more orbitals of the atom’s 
valence shell. As you will see in the next section, atoms inter-
act in a way that completes their valence shells. When they 
do so, it is the unpaired electrons that are involved.
 + +
+ +
++
In each hydrogen
atom, the single electron
is held in its orbital by
its attraction to the
proton in the nucleus.
Hydrogen
molecule (H2)
Hydrogen atoms (2 H)
1
When two hydrogen
atoms approach each
other, the electron of
each atom is also
attracted to the proton
in the other nucleus.
2
The two electrons
become shared in a 
covalent bond,
forming an H2
molecule.
3
. Figure 2.9 Formation of a covalent bond. 
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  I n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  C h e m i c a l  B o n d s
Covalent Bonds
A covalent bond is the sharing of a pair of valence electrons 
by two atoms. For example, let’s consider what happens when 
two hydrogen atoms approach each other. Recall that hydrogen 
has 1 valence electron in the first shell, but the shell’s capacity 
is 2 electrons. When the two hydrogen atoms come close 
enough for their 1s orbitals to overlap, they can share their 
electrons (Figure 2.9). Each hydrogen atom is now associated 
with 2!electrons in what amounts to a completed valence shell. 
Two or more atoms held together by covalent bonds constitute 
a molecule, in this case a hydrogen molecule.
CONCEPT CHECK 2.2
1. A lithium atom has 3 protons and 4 neutrons. What is its 
mass number?
2. A hydrogen atom has 1 proton, and the most common 
isotope of hydrogen has 0 neutrons. A radioactive isotope 
of hydrogen has 2 neutrons. Write the atomic number and 
mass number of this radioactive hydrogen as a chemical 
symbol with a subscript and superscript.
3. How many electrons does fluorine have? How many elec-
tron shells? Name the orbitals that are occupied. How many 
electrons are needed to fill the valence shell?
4. VISUAL SKILLS In Figure 2.7, if two or more elements are 
in the same row, what do they have in common? If two or 
more elements are in the same column, what do they have 
in common?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 2.3
The formation and function 
of molecules and ionic compounds 
depend on chemical bonding 
between atoms
Now that we have looked at the structure of atoms, we can move 
up the hierarchy of organization and see how atoms combine 
to form molecules and ionic compounds. Atoms with incom-
plete valence shells can interact with certain other atoms in 
such a way that each partner atom completes its valence shell: 
The atoms either share or transfer valence electrons. These 
interactions usually result in atoms staying close together, held 
by attractions called chemical bonds. The strongest kinds 
of chemical bonds are covalent bonds in molecules and ionic 
bonds in dry ionic compounds. (Ionic bonds in aqueous, or 
water-based, solutions are weak interactions, as we will see later.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   84 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 86 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 85
electrons are shared equally because the two atoms have the 
same electronegativity—the tug-of-war is at a standoff. Such 
a bond is called a nonpolar covalent bond. For example, 
the single bond of H2 is nonpolar, as is the double bond of O2. 
However, when an atom is bonded to a more electronegative 
atom, the electrons of the bond are not shared equally. This 
type of bond is called a polar covalent bond. Such bonds 
vary in their polarity, depending on the relative electronega-
tivity of the two atoms. For example, the bonds between the 
oxygen and hydrogen atoms of a water molecule are quite 
polar (Figure 2.11).
Oxygen is one of the most electronegative elements, 
attracting shared electrons much more strongly than hydro-
gen does. In a covalent bond between oxygen and hydrogen, 
the electrons spend more time near the oxygen nucleus than 
near the hydrogen nucleus. Because electrons have a negative 
charge and are pulled toward oxygen in a water molecule, 
the oxygen atom has partial negative charges (indicated by 
the Greek letter d with a minus sign, d-, or “delta minus”), 
and the hydrogen atoms have partial positive charges (d+, or 
“delta plus”). In contrast, the individual bonds of methane 
(CH4) are much less polar because the electronegativities of 
carbon and hydrogen are quite similar.
Ionic Bonds
In some cases, two atoms are so unequal in their attraction for 
valence electrons that the more electronegative atom strips 
an electron completely away from its partner. The two result-
ing oppositely charged atoms (or molecules) are called ions. 
A positively charged ion is called a cation, while a negatively 
charged ion is called an anion. (It may help you to think of 
the t in cation as a plus sign, and of anion as “a negative ion.”) 
Because of their opposite charges, cations and anions attract 
each other; this attraction is called an ionic bond. Note that 
the transfer of an electron is not, by itself, the formation of a 
bond; rather, it allows a bond to form because it results in two 
ions of opposite charge. Any two ions of opposite charge can 
form an ionic bond. The ions do not need to have acquired 
their charge by an electron transfer with each other.
The molecules H2 and O2 are pure elements rather than 
compounds because a compound is a combination of two or 
more different elements. Water, with the molecular formula 
H2O, is a compound. Two atoms of hydrogen are needed to 
satisfy the valence of one oxygen atom. Figure 2.10c shows 
the structure of a water molecule. (Water is so important to life 
that Chapter 3 is devoted to its structure and behavior.)
Methane, the main component of natural gas, is a com-
pound with the molecular formula CH4. It takes four hydro-
gen atoms, each with a valence of 1, to complete the valence 
shell of a carbon atom, with its valence of 4 (Figure 2.10d). 
(We’ll look at other carbon compounds in Chapter 4.)
Atoms in a molecule attract shared bonding electrons to 
varying degrees, depending on the element. The attraction of 
a particular atom for the electrons of a covalent bond is called 
its electronegativity. The more electronegative an atom is, 
the more strongly it pulls shared electrons toward itself. In a 
covalent bond between two atoms of the same element, the 
Because oxygen (O) is more electronegative than hydrogen (H), 
shared electrons are pulled more toward oxygen. Thus, the 
covalent bonds in water are polar.
O
f–
f–
f+ f+
H2O
HH
This results in partial negative 
charges on oxygen and partial 
positive charges on the 
hydrogens.
. Figure 2.11 Polar covalent bonds in a water molecule. 
(b) Oxygen (O2).   
Two oxygen atoms 
share two pairs of 
electrons, forming 
a double bond.
H
Electron
Distribution
Diagram
Name and
Molecular
Formula
Lewis Dot
Structure and
Structural
Formula
Space-
Filling
Model
H
OH
H
CH
H
H
H
OO
(a) Hydrogen (H2). 
Two hydrogen atoms 
share one pair of 
electrons, forming 
a single bond.
(c) Water (H2O).   
Two hydrogen 
atoms and one 
oxygen atom are 
joined by single 
bonds, forming a 
molecule of water.
(d) Methane (CH4).   
Four hydrogen 
atoms can satisfy 
the valence of
one carbon
atom, forming 
methane.
HH•
•
O
H
H•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
C
H
H
HH•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
O•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
O•
•
•
•
HH
OO
H
H
O
H
H
H HC
. Figure 2.10 Covalent bonding in four molecules. The 
number of electrons required to complete an atom’s valence shell 
generally determines how many covalent bonds that atom will 
form. This figure shows several ways of indicating covalent bonds.
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  C o v a l e n t  B o n d s
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  N o n p o l a r  a n d  P o l a r  M o l e c u l e s
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   85 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 87 ===

86 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
and anions bonded by their electrical 
attraction and arranged in a three-
dimensional lattice. Unlike a covalent 
compound, which consists of molecules 
having a definite size and number of 
atoms, an ionic compound does not con-
sist of molecules. The formula for an!ionic 
compound, such as NaCl, indicates only 
the ratio of elements in a!crystal of the 
salt. “NaCl” by itself is not!a molecule.
Not all salts have equal numbers of cat-
ions and anions. For example, the ionic 
compound magnesium chloride (MgCl2) 
has two chloride ions for each magnesium 
ion. Magnesium (12Mg) must lose 2 outer 
electrons if the atom is to have a com-
plete valence shell, so it has a tendency 
to become a cation with a net charge of 
2+(Mg2+). One magnesium cation can therefore form ionic 
bonds with two chloride anions (Cl-).
The term ion also applies to entire molecules that are 
electrically charged. In!the salt ammonium chloride (NH4Cl),  
for instance, the anion is a single chloride ion (Cl-), but the 
cation is ammonium (NH4
+), a nitrogen atom covalently 
bonded to four hydrogen atoms. The whole ammonium 
ion has an electrical charge of 1+ because it has given up 
1!electron and thus is 1 electron short.
Environment affects the strength of ionic bonds. In a dry 
salt crystal, the bonds are so strong that it takes a hammer 
and chisel to break enough of them to crack the crystal in 
two. If the same salt crystal is dissolved in water, however, 
the ionic bonds are much weaker because each ion is par-
tially shielded by its interactions with water molecules. Most 
drugs are manufactured as salts because they are quite stable 
when dry!but can dissociate (come apart) easily in water. 
(In!Concept 3.2, you will learn how water dissolves salts.)
Weak Chemical Interactions
In organisms, most of the strongest chemical bonds are cova-
lent bonds, which link atoms to form a cell’s molecules. But 
weaker interactions within and between molecules are also 
indispensable, contributing greatly to the emergent proper-
ties of life. Many large biological molecules are held in their 
functional form by weak interactions. In addition, when two 
molecules in the cell make contact, they may adhere tempo-
rarily by weak interactions. The reversibility of weak interac-
tions can be an advantage: Two molecules can come together, 
affect one another in some way, and then separate.
Several types of weak chemical interactions are important 
in organisms. One is the ionic bond as it exists between ions 
dissociated in water, which we just discussed. Hydrogen 
bonds and van der Waals interactions are also crucial to life.
Cl2
Na1
. Figure 2.13 A sodium chloride (NaCl) crystal. The sodium 
ions (Na+) and chloride ions (Cl-) are held together by ionic bonds. 
The!formula NaCl tells us that the ratio of Na+ to Cl- is 1:1.
Na Cl
Chloride ion
(an anion)
Sodium ion
(a cation)
Chlorine atomSodium atom
Cl–Na+
–+
ClNa
Sodium chloride (NaCl)
Na Cl
     Each resulting ion has a completed
valence shell. An ionic bond can form
between the oppositely charged ions.
2     The single valence electron of a
sodium atom is transferred to join the
7 valence electrons of a chlorine atom.
1
. Figure 2.12 Electron transfer and ionic bonding. The attraction between oppositely 
charged atoms, or ions, is an ionic bond. An ionic bond can form between any two oppositely 
charged ions, even if they have not been formed by transfer of an electron from one to the other.
This is what happens when an atom of sodium 
(11Na) encounters an atom of chlorine (17C1) (Figure 2.12). 
A sodium atom has a total of 11 electrons, with its single 
valence electron in the third electron shell. A chlorine atom 
has a total of 17 electrons, with 7 electrons in its valence 
shell. When these two atoms meet, the lone valence elec-
tron of sodium is transferred to the chlorine atom, and both 
atoms end up with their valence shells complete. (Because 
sodium no longer has an electron in the third shell, the 
second shell is now the valence shell.) The electron transfer 
between the two atoms moves one unit of negative charge 
from sodium to chlorine. Sodium, now with 11 protons 
but only 10!electrons, has a net electrical charge of 1+; the 
sodium atom has become!a cation. Conversely, the chlorine 
atom, having gained an extra electron, now has 17 protons 
and 18!electrons, giving it a net electrical charge of 1- ; it has 
become a chloride ion—an anion.
Compounds formed by ionic bonds are called ionic 
compounds, or salts. We know the ionic compound 
sodium chloride (NaCl) as table salt (Figure 2.13). Salts are 
often found in nature as crystals of various sizes and shapes. 
Each salt crystal is an aggregate of vast numbers of cations 
    Mastering Biology Animation: Formation of 
Ions and Ionic Bonds
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   86 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 88 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 87
multiple projections—maximizes surface contact with the wall. 
The van der Waals interactions between the foot molecules and 
the molecules of the wall’s surface are so numerous that despite 
their individual weakness, together they can support the gecko’s 
body weight. 
Van der Waals interactions, hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds 
in water, and other weak interactions may form not only 
between molecules but also between parts of a large molecule, 
such as a protein or nucleic acid. The cumulative effect of weak 
interactions is to reinforce the three-dimensional shape of the 
molecule. (You will learn more about the very important bio-
logical roles of weak interactions in Figures 5.18 and  5.24.)
Molecular Shape and Function
A molecule has a characteristic size and shape, which are key 
to its function in the living cell. A molecule consisting of two 
atoms, such as H2 or O2, is always linear, but most molecules 
with more than two atoms have more complicated shapes. 
These shapes are determined by the positions of the atoms’ 
orbitals (Figure 2.15). When an atom forms covalent bonds, 
the orbitals in its valence shell undergo rearrangement. 
Van der Waals Interactions
Even a molecule with nonpolar covalent bonds may have 
positively and negatively charged regions. Electrons are not 
always evenly distributed; at any instant, they may accumulate 
by chance in one part of a molecule 
or another. The results are ever-
changing regions of positive and 
negative charge that enable all 
atoms and molecules to stick 
to one another. These van 
der Waals interactions are 
individually weak and occur only 
when atoms and molecules are 
very close together. When many 
such interactions occur simul-
taneously, however, they can be 
powerful: Van der Waals interactions 
allow the gecko lizard shown here to walk 
straight up a wall! The anatomy of the 
gecko’s foot—including toes with hun-
dreds of thousands of tiny hairs, each with 
H H
Ball-and-Stick
Model
Hybrid-Orbital Model
(with ball-and-stick
model superimposed)
Lone 
(unbonded)
pairs of 
electrons
Tetrahedron
Space-Filling
Model
s orbital Three p orbitals
Four hybrid orbitals
Water (H2O)
(a) Hybridization of orbitals. The single s and three p orbitals of a
valence shell involved in covalent bonding combine to form four
teardrop-shaped hybrid orbitals. These orbitals extend to the four
corners of an imaginary tetrahedron (outlined in pink).
(b) Molecular-shape models. Three models representing molecular
shape are shown for water and methane. The positions of the 
hybrid orbitals determine the shapes of the molecules.
 Methane (CH4)
C
H
H
HH
104.58
HH
O
z
y
x
O
H H
C
H
H
H H
. Figure 2.15 Molecular shapes due to hybrid orbitals. 
O
f2 f1
f1
f2
f1 f1
f1
N
H
Water (H2O)
H H
H
H
Ammonia (NH3)
This hydrogen bond 
(dotted line) results from 
the attraction between 
the partial positive 
charge on a hydrogen 
atom of water and the 
partial negative charge 
on the nitrogen atom 
of ammonia.
f 2
. Figure 2.14 A hydrogen bond.
DRAW IT Draw one water molecule hydrogen bonded to four other water 
molecules around it. Use simple outlines of space-filling models. Draw the 
partial charges on the water molecules and use dots for the hydrogen bonds.
  Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  H y d r o g e n  B o n d s
Hydrogen Bonds
Among weak chemical interactions, hydrogen bonds are so cen-
tral to the chemistry of life that they deserve special attention. 
When a hydrogen atom is covalently bonded to an electronega-
tive atom, the hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge that 
allows it to be attracted to a different electronegative atom with 
a partial negative charge nearby. This noncovalent attraction 
between a hydrogen and an electronegative atom is called a 
hydrogen bond. In living cells, the electronegative partners 
are usually oxygen or nitrogen atoms. Figure 2.14 shows hydro-
gen bonding between water (H2O) and ammonia (NH3).
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   87 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 89 ===

88 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
For atoms with valence electrons in both s and p orbitals 
(review Figure 2.8), the single s and three p orbitals form four 
new hybrid orbitals shaped like identical teardrops extend-
ing from the region of the atomic nucleus, as shown in 
Figure 2.15a. If we connect the larger ends of the teardrops 
with lines, we have the outline of a geometric shape called a 
tetrahedron, a pyramid with a triangular base.
For water molecules (H2O), two of the hybrid orbitals in 
the oxygen’s valence shell are shared with hydrogens. The 
other two hybrid orbitals are occupied by lone (unbonded) 
pairs of electrons (see Figure 2.15b). The result is a molecule 
shaped roughly like a V, with its two covalent bonds at an 
angle of 104.5/uni00B0.
The methane molecule (CH4) has the shape of a com-
pleted tetrahedron because all four hybrid orbitals of 
the carbon atom are shared with hydrogen atoms (see 
Figure 2.15b). The carbon nucleus is at the center, with its 
four covalent bonds radiating to hydrogen nuclei at the 
corners of the tetrahedron. Larger molecules containing 
multiple carbon atoms, including many of the molecules 
that make up living matter, have more complex overall 
shapes. However, the tetrahedral shape of a carbon atom 
bonded to four other atoms is often a repeating motif 
within such molecules.
Molecular shape is crucial: It determines how biologi-
cal molecules recognize and respond to one another with 
specificity. Biological molecules often bind temporarily to 
each other by forming weak interactions, but only if their 
shapes are complementary. Consider the effects of opiates, 
drugs such as morphine and heroin derived from opium. 
Opiates relieve pain and alter mood by weakly binding to 
specific receptor molecules on the surfaces of brain cells. 
Why would brain cells carry receptors for opiates, com-
pounds that are not endogenous, made by the body? In 1975, 
this question was answered by the discovery of endorphins 
(or “endogenous morphines”). Endorphins are signaling 
molecules made by the pituitary gland that bind to the 
receptors, relieving pain and producing euphoria during 
times of stress, such as intense exercise. Opiates have shapes 
similar to endorphins and can bind to endorphin recep-
tors in the brain. That is why opiates and endorphins have 
similar effects (Figure 2.16). The role of molecular shape in 
brain chemistry illustrates how biological organization leads 
to a match between structure and function, one of biology’s 
 u n i f y i n g  t h e m e s .
Natural endorphin
(a)Structures of endorphin and morphine. The boxed portion of
the endorphin molecule (left) binds to receptor molecules on target
cells in the brain. The boxed portion of the morphine molecule 
(right) is a close match.
Morphine
Endorphin
receptors
Natural
endorphin Morphine
Brain cell
(b)Binding to endorphin receptors. Both endorphin and morphine 
can bind to endorphin receptors on the surface of a brain cell.
Nitrogen
Sulfur
Carbon
Hydrogen
Oxygen
Key
. Figure 2.16 A molecular mimic. Morphine affects pain perception 
and emotional state by mimicking the brain’s natural endorphins.
CONCEPT CHECK 2.3
1. Why does the structure H¬C“C¬H fail to make sense 
chemically?
2. Which bond is more polar: the O¬H bond in H2O or the 
C¬H bond in CH4?
3. WHAT IF? If you were a pharmaceutical researcher, why 
would you want to learn the three-dimensional shapes of 
naturally occurring signaling molecules?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Chemical reactions make  
and break chemical bonds
The making and breaking of chemical bonds, leading to 
changes in the composition of matter, are called chemical 
reactions. An example is the reaction between hydrogen 
and oxygen molecules that forms water:
Reactants Products
1
2 H2 2 H2OO2
Chemical
reaction 
1
CONCEPT 2.4
  Mastering Biology 
Interview with Candace Pert: Discovering 
opiate receptors in the brain
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   88 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 90 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 89
another and have an opportunity to react and form products. 
The same holds true for products. As products accumulate, 
collisions resulting in the reverse reaction become more fre-
quent. Eventually, the forward and reverse reactions occur 
at the same rate, and the relative concentrations of products 
and reactants stop changing. The point at which the reactions 
offset one another exactly is called chemical equilibrium. 
This is a dynamic equilibrium; reactions are still going on in 
both directions, but with no net effect on the concentrations 
of reactants and products. Equilibrium does not mean that 
the reactants and products are equal in concentration, but 
only that their concentrations have stabilized at a particular 
ratio. The reaction involving ammonia reaches equilibrium 
when ammonia decomposes as rapidly as it forms. In some 
chemical reactions, the equilibrium point may lie so far to the 
right that these reactions go essentially to completion; that is, 
virtually all the reactants are converted to products.
We will return to the subject of chemical reactions after more 
detailed study of the various types of molecules that are impor-
tant to life. In the next chapter, we focus on water, the sub-
stance in which all the chemical processes of organisms occur.
This reaction breaks the covalent bonds of H2 and O2 and 
forms the new bonds of H2O. When we write the equation for a 
chemical reaction, we use an arrow to indicate the conversion 
of the starting materials, called the reactants, to the resulting 
materials, or products. The coefficients indicate the number 
of molecules involved; for example, the coefficient 2 before the 
H2 means that the reaction starts with two molecules of hydro-
gen. Notice that all atoms of the reactants must be accounted 
for in the products. Matter is conserved in a chemical reaction: 
Reactions cannot create or destroy atoms but can only rear-
range (redistribute) the electrons among them.
Photosynthesis, which takes place within the cells of 
green plant tissues, is an important biological example of 
how chemical reactions rearrange matter. Humans and other 
animals ultimately depend on photosynthesis for food and 
oxygen, and this process is at the foundation of life in almost 
all ecosystems.
The following summarizes photosynthesis:
6 CO2
Carbon dioxide
C6H12O6
Glucose
6 H2O
Water
6 O2
Oxygen
Reactants Products
Sunlight+ +
The raw materials of photosynthesis are carbon dioxide 
(CO2) and water (H2O), which land plants absorb from the air 
and soil, respectively. Within the plant cells, sunlight powers 
the conversion of these ingredients to a sugar called glucose 
(C6H12O6) and oxygen molecules (O2), a by-product that can 
be seen when released by a water plant (Figure 2.17). Although 
photosynthesis is actually a sequence of many chemical reac-
tions, we still end up with the same number and types of 
atoms that we had when we started. Matter has simply been 
rearranged, with an input of energy provided by sunlight.
All chemical reactions are theoretically reversible, with 
the products of the forward reaction becoming the reactants 
for the reverse reaction. For example, hydrogen and nitrogen 
molecules can combine to form ammonia, but ammonia can 
also decompose to regenerate hydrogen and nitrogen:
Bubbles of O2Leafc Figure 2.17  
Photosynthesis: a solar-
powered rearrangement of 
matter. Elodea, a freshwater 
plant, produces sugar by 
rearranging the atoms of 
carbon dioxide and water in 
the chemical process known 
as photosynthesis, which is 
powered by sunlight. Much of 
the sugar is then converted to 
other food molecules. Oxygen 
gas (O2) is a by-product of 
photosynthesis; notice the 
bubbles of O2 gas escaping from 
the leaves submerged in water.
DRAW IT Add labels and arrows on the photo showing the reactants 
and products of photosynthesis as it takes place in a leaf.
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Consider the reaction between 
hydrogen and oxygen that forms water, shown with ball-
and-stick models at the beginning of Concept 2.4. After 
studying Figure 2.10, draw and label the Lewis dot struc-
tures representing this reaction.
2. Which type of chemical reaction, if any, occurs faster at 
equilibrium: the formation of products from reactants or 
that of reactants from products?
3. WHAT IF? Write an equation that uses the products of pho-
tosynthesis as reactants and the reactants of photosynthesis 
as products. Add energy as another product. This new equa-
tion describes a process that occurs in your cells. Describe 
this equation in words. How does this equation relate to 
breathing?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 2.4
3 H2+N2 L 2 NH3
The two opposite-headed arrows indicate that the reaction is 
reversible.
One of the factors affecting the rate of a reaction is the 
concentration of reactants. The greater the concentration of 
reactant molecules, the more frequently they collide with one 
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   89 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 91 ===

90 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
     Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the!Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
2 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 2.1
Matter consists of chemical elements in pure form and 
in combinations called compounds (pp. 77–78)
• Elements cannot be broken down chemically to other sub-
stances. A compound contains two or more different elements 
in a fixed ratio. Oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen make up 
approximately 96% of living matter.
? Compare an element and a compound.
CONCEPT 2.2
An element’s properties depend on the structure of its 
atoms (pp. 78–84)
• An atom, the smallest unit of an element, has the following 
components:
–
–
Nucleus
Protons (+ charge)
determine element Electrons (– charge)
form negative cloud
and determine
chemical behaviorNeutrons (no charge)
determine isotope
Atom
+
+
• An electrically neutral atom has equal numbers of electrons 
and protons; the number of protons determines the atomic 
number. The atomic mass is measured in daltons and is 
roughly equal to the mass number, the sum of protons plus 
neutrons. Isotopes of an element differ from each other in 
neutron number and therefore mass. Unstable isotopes give off 
particles and energy as radioactivity.
• In an atom, electrons occupy specific electron shells; the electrons 
in a shell have a characteristic energy level. Electron distribution in 
shells determines the chemical behavior of an atom. An atom that 
has an incomplete outer shell, the valence shell, is reactive.
• Electrons exist in orbitals, three-dimensional spaces with spe-
cific shapes that are components of electron shells.
DRAW IT Draw the electron distribution diagrams for neon (10Ne) 
and argon (18Ar). Use these diagrams to explain why these elements are 
chemically unreactive.
CONCEPT 2.3
The formation and function of molecules and ionic 
compounds depend on chemical bonding between 
atoms (pp. 84–88)
• Chemical bonds form when atoms interact and complete their 
valence shells. Covalent bonds form when pairs of electrons are 
shared:
H  1 H 1
Single
covalent bond
Double
covalent bond
HH•• •
• O•
•
•
•
•
•
O•
• O•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•O•
•
•
••
•
• Molecules consist of two or more covalently bonded atoms. The 
attraction of an atom for the electrons of a covalent bond is its 
electronegativity. If both atoms are the same, they have the 
same electronegativity and share a nonpolar covalent bond. 
Electrons of a polar covalent bond are pulled closer to the more 
electronegative atom, such as the oxygen in H2O.
• An ion forms when an atom or molecule gains or loses an elec-
tron and becomes charged. An ionic bond is the attraction be-
tween two oppositely charged ions:
Na Cl
Chloride ion
(an anion)
Sodium ion
(a cation)
Electron
transfer
forms ions
Chlorine atomSodium atom
Cl2Na1
21
ClNa
Ionic bond
Na Cl
• Weak interactions reinforce the shapes of large molecules 
and help molecules adhere to each other. A hydrogen bond 
is an!attraction between a hydrogen atom carrying a partial 
positive charge (d+) and an electronegative atom carrying a 
partial negative charge (d-). V an der Waals interactions 
occur!between transiently positive and negative regions of 
molecules.
• A molecule’s shape is determined by the positions of its 
atoms’!valence orbitals. Covalent bonds result in hybrid orbitals, 
which are responsible for the shapes of H2O, CH4, and many 
more!complex biological molecules. Molecular shape is usually 
the basis for the recognition of one biological molecule by 
another.
? In terms of electron sharing between atoms, compare nonpolar 
covalent bonds, polar covalent bonds, and the formation of ions.
Chemical reactions make and break chemical bonds 
(pp. 88–89)
• Chemical reactions change reactants into products while 
conserving matter. All chemical reactions are theoretically revers-
ible. Chemical equilibrium is reached when the forward and 
reverse reaction rates are equal.
? What would happen to the concentration of products if more 
reactants were added to a reaction that was in chemical equilibrium? 
How would this addition affect the equilibrium?
CONCEPT 2.4
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–8 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   90 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 92 ===

 CHAPTER 2  Atoms and Molecules 91
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION While waiting 
at an airport, Neil Campbell once overheard this claim: “It’s 
paranoid and ignorant to worry about industry or agriculture 
contaminating the environment with their chemical wastes. 
After all, this stuff is just made of the same atoms that were 
already present in our environment.” Drawing on your 
knowledge of electron distribution, bonding, and emergent 
properties (see Concept 1.1), write a short essay (100-150 
words) countering this argument.
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE  
9. DRAW IT Draw Lewis dot structures for each hypothetical 
molecule shown below, using the correct number of valence 
electrons for each atom. Determine which molecule makes 
sense because each atom has a complete valence shell and each 
bond has the correct number of electrons. Explain what makes 
the other molecule nonsensical, considering the number of 
bonds each type of atom can make.
CO OH
H
C
H
H(a)
HC OH
HH
C
H(b)
10. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Some species have become 
adapted to extremely harsh environments. How can such 
specially adapted species be used for the benefit of humans? 
Explain with a suitable example.
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Female 
luna moths (Actias luna) attract 
males by emitting chemical 
signals that spread through 
the air. A male hundreds of 
meters away can detect these 
molecules and fly toward their 
source. The sensory organs 
responsible for this behavior are 
the comblike antennae visible 
in the photograph shown here. 
Each filament of an antenna 
is equipped with thousands of 
receptor cells that detect the sex 
attractant. Based on what you learned in this chapter,  
propose a hypothesis to account for the ability of the male 
moth to detect a specific molecule in the presence of many 
other molecules in the air. What predictions does your 
hypothesis make? Design an experiment to test one of these 
predictions.
This bombardier beetle is spraying a boiling hot liquid that 
contains irritating chemicals, used as a defense mechanism 
against its enemies. The beetle stores two sets of chemicals 
separately in its glands. Using what you learned about 
chemistry in this chapter, propose a possible explanation for 
why the beetle is not harmed by the chemicals it stores and 
what causes the explosive discharge.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C02_PRF.indd   91 3/13/20   11:51 PM

=== SIDE 93 ===

Figure 3.1 R i n g e d  s e a l s  (Phoca hispida) depend on Arctic sea ice as a platform from 
which to hunt for fish in the water below. As Earth warms from climate change, the 
melting of sea ice is a threat to species that live on, under, and around the floating ice.
The Chemistry of Water3
How does water’s structure allow its 
solid form (ice) to float on liquid water?
Water (H2O) is a 
polar molecule: 
At one end, the O has  
partial negative charges 
(f2) because O pulls 
electrons toward itself.
At the other end, the 
H atoms have partial 
positive charges (f1).
Weak attractions between 
oppositely charged regions 
of water molecules, called 
hydrogen bonds, allow water 
molecules to bond to each other.
In liquid water, the 
hydrogen bonds constantly 
break and re-form. As a 
result, the water 
molecules can slip 
closer together.
In ice, the hydrogen 
bonds are stable 
and the water 
molecules are 
farther apart. 
Therefore, ice is less 
dense than liquid 
water, so it floats.
Floating ice insulates the water below, 
enabling survival of aquatic life. Water also 
has other life-supporting properties, as you’ll see.
H
O
H
H
O
H
f2
f2
f2 f2
f1f1
f1
f1
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 3
• BioFlix® Animation: Adhesion and 
Cohesion in Plants
• Animation: Acids, Bases, and pH
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Chemistry Review–Atoms and Molecules: 
Polar Attractions
• Chemistry Review–Water: Properties 
of!Water
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Draw 
a diagram and write a caption that 
explains how the structure of water 
supports life for each of the following 
properties of water:
Cohesion of water
molecules
Moderation of
temperature
Floating of ice The solvent of life
The Properties of Water
 3.1 Polar covalent bonds in water 
molecules result in hydrogen 
bonding p. 93
 3.2 Four emergent properties of water 
contribute to Earth’s suitability for 
life p. 93
 3.3 Acidic and basic conditions affect 
living organisms p. 99
92
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   92 3/13/20   11:53 PM

=== SIDE 94 ===

 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 93
are hydrogen-bonded to their neighbors. The extraordinary 
properties of water emerge from this hydrogen bonding, which 
organizes water molecules into a higher level of structural order.Polar covalent bonds in water 
molecules result in hydrogen 
bonding
Water is so familiar to us that it is easy to overlook its many 
extraordinary qualities. Following the theme of emergent 
properties, we can trace water’s unique behavior to the 
structure and interactions of its molecules.
Studied on its own, the water molecule is deceptively sim-
ple. It is shaped like a wide V, with its two hydrogen atoms 
joined to the oxygen atom by single covalent bonds. Oxygen 
is more electronegative than hydrogen, so the electrons of 
the covalent bonds spend more time closer to oxygen than to 
hydrogen; these are polar covalent bonds (see Figure 2.11). 
This unequal sharing of electrons and water’s V-like shape 
make it a polar molecule, meaning that its overall charge 
is unevenly distributed. In water, the oxygen of the molecule 
has partial negative charges (d-), and the hydrogens have 
partial positive charges (d+).
The properties of water arise from attractions between oppo-
sitely charged atoms of different water molecules: The partially 
positive hydrogen of one molecule is attracted to the partially 
negative oxygen of a nearby molecule. The two molecules are 
thus held together by a hydrogen bond (Figure 3.2). When 
water is in its liquid form, its hydrogen bonds are very fragile, 
each only about 1/20 as strong as a covalent bond. The hydro-
gen bonds form, break, and re-form with great frequency. Each 
lasts only a few trillionths of a second, but the molecules are 
constantly forming new hydrogen bonds with a succession of 
partners. Therefore, at any instant, most of the water molecules 
CONCEPT 3.1
CONCEPT CHECK 3.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS What is electronegativity, and 
how does it affect interactions between water molecules? 
(Review Figure 2.11.)
2. VISUAL SKILLS Look at Figure 3.2 and explain why the 
central water molecule can hydrogen-bond to other water 
molecules.
3. Why is it unlikely that two neighboring water 
molecules would be arranged like this?
4. WHAT IF? What would be the effect on the 
properties of the water molecule if oxygen and hydrogen 
had equal electronegativity?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 3.2
Four emergent properties of water 
contribute to Earth’s suitability for life
We will examine four emergent properties of water that con-
tribute to Earth’s suitability as an environment for life: cohe-
sive behavior, ability to moderate temperature, expansion 
upon freezing, and versatility as a solvent.
Cohesion of Water Molecules
Water molecules stay close to each other as a result of hydro-
gen bonding. Although the arrangement of molecules in a 
sample of liquid water is constantly changing, at any given 
moment many of the molecules are linked by multiple hydro-
gen bonds. These linkages make water more structured than 
most other liquids. Collectively, the hydrogen bonds hold 
the substance together, a phenomenon called cohesion.
One result of cohesion due to hydrogen bonding is high 
surface tension, a measure of how difficult it is to stretch 
or break the surface of a liquid. At the air-water interface is an 
ordered arrangement of water molecules, hydrogen-bonded to 
one another and to the water below, but not to the air above. 
This asymmetry gives water an unusually high surface ten-
sion, making it behave as though it were coated with an invis-
ible film. The spider in Figure 3.3 takes advantage of the sur-
face tension of water to walk across a pond without breaking 
H
O
H
H
O
H
f2
f2
f2 f2
f1f1
f1
f1
f1
f1
f2
The charged regions 
in a water molecule 
are due to its polar 
covalent bonds.
Oxygen can form 
two hydrogen 
bonds.
Each water molecule can 
hydrogen-bond to several 
others; these associations 
are constantly changing.
Regions of neighboring water 
molecules with opposite partial 
charges are attracted to each 
other, forming hydrogen bonds. 
. Figure 3.2 Hydrogen bonds between water molecules.
DRAW IT Draw partial charges on the water molecule at the far left, 
and draw three more water molecules hydrogen-bonded to it.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Polarity of Water
c Figure 3.3 Walking on 
water. The high surface 
tension of water, resulting 
from the collective strength 
of its hydrogen bonds, allows 
this raft spider to walk on the 
surface of a pond.
H H
H H
OO
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   93 3/13/20   11:53 PM

=== SIDE 95 ===

94 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Temperature and Heat
Anything that moves has kinetic energy, the energy of 
motion. Atoms and molecules have kinetic energy because 
they are always moving, although not necessarily in any 
particular direction. The faster a molecule moves, the 
greater its kinetic energy. The kinetic energy associated 
with the random movement of atoms or molecules is called 
thermal energy. Thermal energy is related to temperature, 
but they are not the same thing. Temperature represents 
the average kinetic energy of the molecules in a body of mat-
ter, regardless of volume, whereas the thermal energy of 
a body of matter reflects the total kinetic energy, and thus 
depends on the matter’s volume. When water is heated in a 
coffeemaker, the average speed of the molecules increases, 
and the thermometer records this as a rise in temperature of 
the liquid. The total amount of thermal energy also increases 
in this case. Note, however, that although the pot of cof-
fee has a much higher temperature than, say, the water in a 
swimming pool, the swimming pool contains more thermal 
energy because of its much greater volume.
Whenever two objects of different temperature are 
brought together, thermal energy passes from the warmer 
to the cooler object until the two are the same temperature. 
Molecules in the cooler object speed up at the expense of 
the thermal energy of the warmer object. An ice cube cools a 
drink not by adding coldness to the liquid but by absorbing 
thermal energy from the liquid as the ice itself melts. Thermal 
energy in transfer from one body of matter to another is 
defined as heat.
One convenient unit of heat used in this book is the 
calorie (cal). A calorie is the amount of heat it takes to raise 
the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C. Conversely, a calorie is 
also the amount of heat that 1 g of water releases when it cools 
by 1°C. A kilocalorie (kcal), 1,000 cal, is the quantity of heat 
required to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram (kg) of water 
by 1°C. (The “Calories” on food packages are actually kilocalo-
ries.) Another energy unit used in this book is the joule (J). 
One joule equals 0.239 cal; one calorie equals 4.184 J.
Water’s High Specific Heat
The ability of water to stabilize temperature stems from its rel-
atively high specific heat. The specific heat of a substance 
is defined as the amount of heat that must be absorbed or lost 
for 1 g of that substance to change its temperature by 1°C. We 
already know water’s specific heat because we have defined 
a calorie as the amount of heat that causes 1 g of water to 
change its temperature by 1°C. Therefore, the specific heat of 
water is 1 calorie per gram and per degree Celsius, abbreviated 
as 1 cal/(g#°C). Compared with most other substances, water 
has an unusually high specific heat. For example, ethyl alco-
hol, the type of alcohol in alcoholic beverages, has a specific 
heat of 0.6 cal/(g#°C); that is, only 0.6 cal is required to raise 
the temperature of 1 g of ethyl alcohol by 1°C.
the surface, and some plants can float on water as well. You 
can observe the surface tension of water by slightly!overfilling 
a drinking glass; the water will stand above the rim.
Cohesion also contributes to the transport of water and 
dissolved nutrients against gravity in plants (Figure 3.4). 
Water from the roots reaches the leaves through a network 
of water-conducting cells. As water evaporates from a leaf, 
hydrogen bonds cause water molecules leaving the veins to 
tug on molecules farther down, and the upward pull is trans-
mitted through the water-conducting cells all the way to the 
roots. Adhesion, the clinging of one substance to another, 
also plays a role. Adhesion of water by hydrogen bonds to the 
molecules of cell walls helps counter the downward pull of 
gravity (see Figure 3.4).
Adhesion of the water to cell walls 
by hydrogen bonds helps resist the 
downward pull of gravity.
Cohesion due to 
hydrogen bonds 
between water 
molecules helps 
hold together 
the column of 
water within 
the cells.
300 om
Direction
of water
movement
Two types of
water-conducting
cells
H2O
H2O
H2O
Evaporation from leaves pulls water 
upward from the roots through 
water-conducting cells.
. Figure 3.4 Water transport in plants. Evaporation from leaves 
pulls water upward from the roots through water-conducting cells. 
Because of the properties of cohesion and adhesion, the tallest trees 
can transport water more than 100 m upward—approximately one-
quarter the height of the Empire State Building in New York City.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Adhesion and 
Cohesion in Plants • Animation: Cohesion of Water
Moderation of Temperature by Water
Water moderates air temperature by absorbing heat from air 
that is warmer and releasing stored heat to air that is cooler. 
Water is effective as a heat bank because it can absorb or 
release a relatively large amount of heat with only a slight 
change in its own temperature. To understand this capability 
of water, let’s first look at temperature and heat.
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   94 3/13/20   11:53 PM

=== SIDE 96 ===

 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 95
Evaporative Cooling
Molecules of any liquid stay close together because they are 
attracted to one another. Molecules moving fast enough to 
overcome these attractions can depart the liquid and enter 
the air as a gas (vapor). This transformation from a liquid to 
a gas is called vaporization, or evaporation. Recall that the 
speed of molecular movement varies and that temperature 
is the average kinetic energy of molecules. Even at low tem-
peratures, the speediest molecules can escape into the air. 
Some evaporation occurs at any temperature; a glass of water 
at room temperature, for example, will eventually evaporate 
completely. If a liquid is heated, the average kinetic energy of 
molecules increases and the liquid evaporates more rapidly.
Heat of vaporization is the quantity of heat a liquid must 
absorb for 1 g of it to be converted from the liquid to the gas-
eous state. For the same reason that water has a high specific 
heat, it also has a high heat of vaporization relative to most 
other liquids. To evaporate 1 g of water at 25°C, about 580 cal of 
heat is needed—nearly double the amount needed to vaporize a 
gram of alcohol or ammonia. Water’s high heat of vaporization 
is another emergent property resulting from the strength of its 
hydrogen bonds, which must be broken before the molecules 
can exit from the liquid in the form of water vapor.
The high amount of energy required to vaporize water has 
a wide range of effects. On a global scale, for example, it helps 
moderate Earth’s climate. A considerable amount of solar heat 
absorbed by tropical seas is consumed during the evaporation 
of surface water. Then, as moist tropical air circulates pole-
ward, it releases heat as it condenses and forms rain. On an 
organismal level, water’s high heat of vaporization accounts 
for the severity of steam burns. These burns are caused by the 
heat energy released (during formation of hydrogen bonds) 
when steam condenses into liquid on the skin.
As a liquid evaporates, the surface of the liquid that 
remains behind cools down (its temperature decreases). This 
evaporative cooling occurs because the “hottest” mol-
ecules, those with the greatest kinetic energy, are the most 
likely to leave as gas. It is as if the 100 fastest runners at a col-
lege transferred to another school; the average speed of the 
remaining students would decline.
Evaporative cooling of water contributes to the stability of 
temperature in lakes and ponds and also provides a mechanism 
that prevents terrestrial organisms from overheating. For exam-
ple, evaporation of water from the leaves of a plant helps keep 
the tissues in the leaves from becoming too warm in the sun-
light. Evaporation of sweat from human skin dissipates body 
heat and helps prevent overheating on a hot day or when excess 
heat is generated by strenuous activity. High humidity on a hot 
day increases discomfort because the high concentration of 
water vapor in the air inhibits the evaporation of sweat from the 
body. Animals without sweat glands, such as elephants, may 
spray water on themselves to cool down (Figure 3.6).
Because of the high specific heat of water relative to other 
materials, water will change its temperature less than other 
liquids when it absorbs or loses a given amount of heat. The 
reason you can burn your fingers by touching the side of an 
iron pot on the stove when the water in the pot is still luke-
warm is that the specific heat of water is ten times greater 
than that of iron. In other words, the same amount of heat 
will raise the temperature of 1 g of the iron much faster than 
it will raise the temperature of 1 g of the water. Specific heat 
can be thought of as a measure of how well a substance resists 
changing its temperature when it absorbs or releases heat. 
Water resists changing its temperature; when it does change 
its temperature, it absorbs or loses a relatively large quantity 
of heat for each degree of change.
We can trace water’s high specific heat, like many of 
its other properties, to hydrogen bonding. Heat must be 
absorbed in order to break hydrogen bonds; by the same 
token, heat is released when hydrogen bonds form. A calorie 
of heat causes a relatively small change in the temperature of 
water because much of the heat is used to disrupt hydrogen 
bonds before the water molecules can begin moving faster. 
And when the temperature of water drops slightly, many 
additional hydrogen bonds form, releasing a considerable 
amount of energy in the form of heat.
What is the relevance of water’s high specific heat to life 
on Earth? A large body of water can absorb and store a huge 
amount of heat from the sun in the daytime and during 
summer while warming up only a few degrees. At night and 
during winter, the gradually cooling water can warm the 
air. This capability of water serves to moderate air tempera-
tures in coastal areas (Figure 3.5). The high specific heat of 
water also tends to stabilize ocean temperatures, creating a 
favorable environment for marine life. Thus, because of its 
high specific heat, the water that covers most of Earth keeps 
temperature fluctuations on land and in water within limits 
that permit life. Also, because organisms are made primarily 
of water, they are better able to resist changes in their own 
temperature than if they were made of a liquid with a lower 
specific heat.
Riverside 96°
San Bernardino 
100°
Burbank
90°
Santa Ana
  84° Palm Springs 
106°
San Diego 72°
Los Angeles
(Airport) 75°
Santa Barbara 73°
Pacific Ocean 68°
70s (°F)
80s
90s
100s 40 miles
. Figure 3.5 Temperatures for the Pacific Ocean and 
Southern California on an August day.
INTERPRET THE DATA Explain the pattern of temperatures shown 
in this diagram.
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   95 3/13/20   11:53 PM

=== SIDE 97 ===

96 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
of the molecules are connected by hydrogen bonds, though 
only transiently: The hydrogen bonds are constantly break-
ing and re-forming.
The ability of ice to float due to its lower density is an impor-
tant factor in the suitability of the environment for life. If ice 
sank, then eventually ponds, lakes, and even oceans could 
freeze solid, making life as we know it impossible on Earth. 
During summer, only the upper few inches of the ocean would 
thaw. Instead, when a deep body of water cools, the ice floats, 
insulating the liquid water below. This prevents it from freezing 
and allows life to exist under the frozen surface, as shown in 
Figure 3.1. Besides insulating the water below, ice also provides 
a solid habitat for some animals, such as polar bears and seals.
Many scientists are worried that these bodies of ice are 
at risk of disappearing. Global warming, which is caused by 
carbon dioxide and other “greenhouse” gases in the atmo-
sphere (see Figure 56.30), is having a profound effect on icy 
environments around the globe. In the Arctic, the average 
air temperature has risen 2.2°C just since 1961. This tem-
perature increase has affected the seasonal balance between 
Arctic sea ice and liquid water, causing ice to form later in the 
year, to melt earlier, and to cover a smaller area. The rate at 
which glaciers and Arctic sea ice are disappearing is posing 
an extreme challenge to animals that depend on ice for their 
survival (Figure 3.7).
Water molecules with the 
greatest kinetic energy leave as 
gas, making the remaining 
liquid water cooler.
. Figure 3.6 Evaporative cooling. In hot weather, an elephant 
sprays water from its trunk onto its head. Evaporation of this water 
cools the elephant down. 
Floating of Ice on Liquid Water
Water is one of the few substances that are less dense as a 
solid than as a liquid. As a result, ice floats on liquid water. 
While other materials contract and become denser when they 
solidify, water expands. The cause of this exotic behavior is, 
once again, hydrogen bonding. 
At temperatures above 4°C, water 
behaves like other liquids, expand-
ing as it warms and contracting as 
it cools. As the temperature falls 
from 4°C to 0°C, water begins to 
freeze because more and more of its 
molecules are moving too slowly 
to break hydrogen bonds. At 0°C, 
the molecules become locked into 
a crystalline lattice, each water 
molecule hydrogen-bonded to four 
partners (see Figure 3.1). The hydro-
gen bonds keep the molecules at 
“arm’s length,” far enough apart 
to make ice about 10% less dense 
(10% fewer molecules in the same 
volume) than liquid water at 4°C. 
When ice absorbs enough heat 
for its temperature to rise above 
0°C, hydrogen bonds between 
molecules are disrupted. As the 
crystal collapses, the ice melts and 
molecules have fewer hydrogen 
bonds, allowing them to slip closer 
together. Water reaches its great-
est density at 4°C and then begins 
to expand as the molecules move 
faster. Even in liquid water, many 
Bering
Strait
Arctic 
Ocean
Greenland
Extent of ice
sheet in
Sept. 2019
Median extent of
ice sheet in Sept.,
1981–2010
Russia
Alaska
Canada
North Pole
Warm water and more 
light result in more 
phytoplankton, which are 
eaten by other organisms. 
Harmful algal blooms are 
also a threat.  
Loss of floating ice as 
habitat has caused a 
decline in Pacific walrus 
populations due to 
overcrowding and 
deadly stampedes 
on land.
Less ice reduces 
feeding 
opportunities for 
polar bears, who 
hunt from the ice.
Black guillemots in Alaska 
cannot fly from their 
nests on land to their 
fishing grounds at the 
edge of the ice, which 
is now too far from 
land; young birds are 
starving.
Populations of bowhead whales and some 
fish species may be increasing because more 
plankton is available to eat. 
. Figure 3.7 Effects of climate change on the Arctic. Warmer temperatures in the Arctic cause 
more sea ice to melt in the summer. The loss of ice disrupts the ecosystem, affecting many species. 
(Map data is from the National Snow and Ice Data Center.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   96 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 98 ===

 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 97
water-soluble. Such compounds dissolve when water mol-
ecules surround each of the solute molecules, forming hydro-
gen bonds with them. Even molecules as large as proteins 
can dissolve in water if they have ionic and polar regions on 
their surface (Figure 3.9). Many different kinds of polar com-
pounds are dissolved (along with ions) in the water of such 
biological fluids as blood, the sap of plants, and the liquid 
within all cells. Water is the solvent of life.
Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Substances
Any substance that has an affinity for water is said to be 
hydrophilic (from the Greek hydro, water, and philos, loving). 
In some cases, substances can be hydrophilic without actually 
dissolving. For example, some molecules in cells are so large that 
they do not dissolve. Another example of a hydrophilic sub-
stance that does not dissolve is cotton, a plant product. Cotton 
consists of giant molecules of cellulose, a compound with 
numerous regions of partial positive and partial negative charges 
that can form hydrogen bonds with water. Water adheres to 
the cellulose fibers. Thus, a cotton towel does a great job of dry-
ing the body, yet it does not dissolve in the washing machine. 
Cellulose is also present in the walls of water-conducting cells 
in a plant; you read earlier how the adhesion of water to these 
hydrophilic walls helps water move up the plant against gravity.
There are, of course, substances that do not have an affin-
ity for water. Substances that are nonionic and nonpolar (or 
otherwise cannot form hydrogen bonds) actually seem to 
repel water; these substances are said to be hydrophobic 
(from the Greek phobos, fearing). An example from the 
kitchen is vegetable oil, which, as you know, does not mix 
stably with water-based substances such as vinegar. The 
hydrophobic behavior of the oil molecules results from a high 
number of relatively nonpolar covalent bonds, in this case 
Water: The Solvent of Life
A sugar cube placed in a glass of water will dissolve. In time, 
the glass will contain a uniform mixture of sugar and water; 
the concentration of dissolved sugar will be the same every-
where in the mixture. A liquid that is a completely homoge-
neous mixture of two or more substances is called a solution. 
The dissolving agent of a solution is the solvent, and the sub-
stance that is dissolved is the solute. In this case, water is the 
solvent and sugar is the solute. An aqueous solution is one 
in which the solute is dissolved in water; water is the solvent.
Water is a very versatile solvent, a quality we can trace to 
the polarity of the water molecule. Suppose, for example, that 
a spoonful of table salt, the ionic compound sodium chlo-
ride (NaCl), is placed in water (Figure 3.8). At the surface of 
each crystal (grain) of salt, the sodium and chloride ions are 
exposed to the solvent. These ions and regions of the water 
molecules are attracted to each other due to their opposite 
charges. The oxygens of the water molecules have regions of 
partial negative charge that are attracted to sodium cations. 
The hydrogen regions are partially positively charged and 
are attracted to chloride anions. As a result, water molecules 
surround the individual sodium and chloride ions, sepa-
rating and shielding them from one another. The sphere 
of water molecules around each dissolved ion is called a 
hydration shell. Working inward from the surface of each 
salt crystal, water eventually dissolves all the ions. The result is 
a solution of two solutes, sodium cations and chloride anions, 
mixed homogeneously with water, the solvent. Other ionic 
compounds also dissolve in water. Seawater, for instance, con-
tains a great variety of dissolved ions, as do living cells.
A compound does not need to be ionic to dissolve in water; 
many compounds made up of nonionic polar molecules, 
such as the sugar in the sugar cube mentioned earlier, are also 
This oxygen is 
attracted to a partial
positive charge on 
the lysozyme 
molecule.
This hydrogen is 
attracted to a partial
negative charge on 
the lysozyme 
molecule.
f2
f1
f1
f2
. Figure 3.9 A water-soluble protein. Human lysozyme is a 
protein found in tears and saliva that has antibacterial action (see 
Figure 5.16). This model shows the lysozyme molecule (purple) in 
an aqueous environment. Ionic and polar regions on the protein’s 
surface attract the partially charged regions on water molecules.
Na1
Na1
Cl2 Cl2
Negative regions
on oxygens of
polar water
  molecules are
attracted to sodium
cations (Na1).
     Positive regions 
on hydrogens 
of polar water 
molecules 
are attracted 
to chloride 
anions (Cl2). 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
11
1
1
1
1
1
. Figure 3.8 Table salt dissolving in water. A sphere of water 
molecules, called a hydration shell, surrounds each solute ion.
WHAT IF? What would happen if you 
heated this solution for a long time?
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   97 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 99 ===

98 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Water’s capacity as a versatile solvent complements the 
other properties discussed in this chapter. Since these remark-
able properties allow water to support life on Earth so well, 
scientists who seek life elsewhere in the universe look for 
water as a sign that a planet might sustain life.
 Mastering Biology MP3 Tutor: The Properties of Water
Possible Evolution of Life on Other Planets
EVOLUTION Biologists who look for life elsewhere in the uni-
verse (known as astrobiologists) have concentrated their search 
on planets that might have water. More than 800 planets have 
been found outside our solar system, with evidence for the pres-
ence of water vapor on a few. In our own solar system, Mars has 
been a focus of study. Like Earth, Mars has an ice cap at both 
poles. Images from spacecraft sent to Mars showed that ice is 
present just under the surface of Mars and that enough water 
vapor exists in its atmosphere for frost to form. In 2015, scien-
tists found evidence of water flowing on Mars (Figure 3.10), and 
a study using radar in 2018 concluded there is a large reservoir of 
liquid water one mile below surface ice. Drilling below the sur-
face may be the next step in the search for signs of life on Mars. 
If any life-forms or fossils are found, their study will shed light 
on the process of evolution from an entirely new perspective.
bonds between carbon and hydrogen, which share electrons 
almost equally. Hydrophobic molecules related to oils are 
major ingredients of cell membranes. (Imagine what would 
happen to a cell if its membrane dissolved!)
Solute Concentration in Aqueous Solutions
Most of the chemical reactions in organisms involve solutes 
dissolved in water. To understand such reactions, we must 
know how many atoms and molecules are involved and cal-
culate the concentration of solutes in an aqueous solution 
(the number of solute molecules in a volume of solution).
When carrying out experiments, we use mass to calcu-
late the number of molecules. We must first calculate the 
molecular mass, which is the sum of the masses of all 
the atoms in a molecule. As an example, let’s calculate the 
molecular mass of table sugar (sucrose), C12H22O11, by mul-
tiplying the number of atoms by the atomic mass of each 
element (see the periodic table at the back of the book). In 
round numbers of daltons, the mass of a carbon atom is 
12, the mass of a hydrogen atom is 1, and the mass of an 
oxygen atom is 16. Thus, sucrose has a molecular mass of 
(12 * 12)+(22 * 1)+(11 * 16)=342 daltons. Because 
we can’t weigh out small numbers of molecules, we usually 
measure substances in units called moles. Just as a dozen always 
means 12 objects, a mole (mol) represents an exact number 
of objects: 6.02 * 1023, which is called Avogadro’s number. 
Because of the way in which Avogadro’s number and the unit 
dalton were originally defined, there are 6.02 * 1023 daltons in 
1 g. Once we determine the molecular mass of a molecule such 
as sucrose, we can use the same number (342), but with the unit 
gram, to represent the mass of 6.02 * 1023 molecules of sucrose, 
or 1 mol of sucrose (sometimes called the molar mass). To obtain 
1 mol of sucrose in the lab, therefore, we weigh out 342 g.
The practical advantage of measuring a quantity of chemi-
cals in moles is that a mole of one substance has exactly the 
same number of molecules as a mole of any other substance. 
If the molecular mass of substance A is 342 daltons and 
that of substance B is 10 daltons, then 342 g of A will have 
the same number of molecules as 10 g of B. A mole of ethyl 
alcohol (C2H6O) also contains 6.02 * 1023 molecules, but 
its mass is only 46 g because the mass of a molecule of ethyl 
alcohol is less than that of a molecule of sucrose. Measuring 
in moles makes it convenient for scientists working in the 
laboratory to combine substances in fixed ratios of molecules.
How would we make a liter (L) of solution consisting of 
1 mol of sucrose dissolved in water? We would measure out 
342 g of sucrose and then gradually add water, while stirring, 
until the sugar was completely dissolved. We would then add 
enough water to bring the total volume of the solution up to 
1 L. At that point, we would have a 1-molar (1 M) solution of 
sucrose. Molarity—the number of moles of solute per liter 
of solution—is the unit of concentration most often used by 
biologists for aqueous solutions.
CONCEPT CHECK 3.2
1. Describe how properties of water contribute to the upward 
movement of water in a tree.
2. Explain the saying “It’s not the heat; it’s the humidity.”
3. How can the freezing of water crack boulders?
4. WHAT IF? Dishwashing soaps are made up of molecules 
with one hydrophilic end and one hydrophobic end. How 
does this help to clean greasy utensils? What would happen 
if soaps lose their hydrophobic property?
5. INTERPRET THE DATA The concentration of the appetite-
regulating hormone ghrelin is about 1.3 * 10-10 M in the 
blood of a fasting person. How many molecules of ghrelin 
are in 1 L of blood?
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Dark streaks
. Figure 3.10 Evidence for liquid water on Mars. Water 
appears to have helped form these dark streaks that run downhill 
on Mars during the summer. NASA scientists also found evidence 
of hydrated salts, indicating water is present. (This digitally treated 
photograph was taken by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   98 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 100 ===

 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 99
Acids and Bases
What would cause an aqueous solution to have an imbal-
ance in H+ and OH- concentrations? When acids dissolve in 
water, they donate additional H+ to the solution. An acid is a 
substance that increases the hydrogen ion concentration of a 
solution. For example, when hydrochloric acid (HCl) is added 
to water, hydrogen ions dissociate from chloride ions:
HCl S H+ + Cl-
This source of H+ (dissociation of water is the other source) 
results in an acidic solution—one having more H+ than OH-.
A substance that reduces the hydrogen ion concentration 
of a solution is called a base. Some bases reduce the H+ con-
centration directly by accepting hydrogen ions. Ammonia 
(NH3), for instance, acts as a base when the unshared electron 
pair in nitrogen’s valence shell attracts a hydrogen ion from 
the solution, resulting in an ammonium ion (NH4
+):
NH3+H+ L NH4
+
Other bases reduce the H+ concentration indirectly by dissoci-
ating to form hydroxide ions, which combine with hydrogen 
ions and form water. One such base is sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH), which in water dissociates into its ions:
NaOH S Na++OH-
In either case, the base reduces the H+ concentration. 
Solutions with a higher concentration of OH- than H+ are 
known as basic solutions. A solution in which the H+ and 
OH- concentrations are equal is said to be neutral.
Notice that single arrows were used in the reactions for 
HCl and NaOH. These compounds dissociate completely 
when mixed with water, so hydrochloric acid is called a 
strong acid and sodium hydroxide a strong base. In contrast, 
ammonia is a weak base. The double arrows in the reaction 
for ammonia indicate that the binding and release of hydro-
gen ions are reversible reactions, although at equilibrium 
there will be a fixed ratio of NH4
+ to NH3.
Weak acids are acids that reversibly release and accept back 
hydrogen ions. An example is carbonic acid:
H2CO3 L HCO3
- + H+
Carbonic acid Bicarbonate ion Hydrogen ion
Here the equilibrium so favors the reaction in the left direc-
tion that when carbonic acid is added to pure water, only 
1% of the molecules are dissociated at any particular time. 
Still, that is enough to shift the balance of H+ and OH- from 
neutrality.
The pH Scale
In any aqueous solution at 25°C, the product of the H+ and 
OH- concentrations is constant at 10-14. This can be written
3H+43OH-4=10-14
Acidic and basic conditions affect 
living organisms
Occasionally, a hydrogen atom participating in a hydrogen bond 
between two water molecules shifts from one molecule to the 
other. When this happens, the hydrogen atom leaves its electron 
behind, and what is actually transferred is a hydrogen ion (H+),  
a single proton with a charge of 11. The water molecule that lost 
a proton is now a hydroxide ion (OH-), which has a charge 
of!1-. The proton binds to the other water molecule, making 
that molecule a hydronium ion (H3O+). We can picture the 
chemical reaction as follows:
H OO
HH H
H
OH O
H
+ –
Hydronium
ion (H3O+)
2 H2O Hydroxide
ion (OH–)
H
1
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  D i s s o c i a t i o n  o f  W a t e r  M o l e c u l e s
By convention, H+ (the hydrogen ion) is used to represent 
H3O+ (the hydronium ion), and we follow that practice in 
this book. Keep in mind, though, that H+ does not exist on 
its own in an aqueous solution. It is always associated with a 
water molecule in the form of H3O+.
As indicated by the double arrows, this is a reversible 
reaction that reaches a state of dynamic equilibrium when 
water molecules dissociate at the same rate that they are 
being reformed from H+ and OH-. At this equilibrium 
point, the concentration of water molecules greatly exceeds 
the concentrations of H+ and OH-. In pure water, only 
one water molecule in every 554 million is dissociated; 
the concentration of H+ and of OH- in pure water is 
therefore 10-7 M (at 25°C). This means there is only one 
ten-millionth of a mole of hydrogen ions per liter of pure 
water and an equal number of hydroxide ions. (Even so, this 
is a huge number—over 60,000 trillion—of each ion in a liter 
of pure water.)
Although the dissociation of water is reversible and sta-
tistically rare, it is exceedingly important in the chemistry 
of life. H+ and OH- are very reactive. Changes in their con-
centrations can drastically affect a cell’s proteins and other 
complex molecules. As we have seen, the concentrations 
of H+ and OH- are equal in pure water, but adding certain 
kinds of solutes, called acids and bases, disrupts this balance. 
Biologists use something called the pH scale to describe 
how acidic or basic (the opposite of acidic) a solution is. In 
the remainder of this chapter, you will learn about acids, 
bases, and pH and why changes in pH can adversely affect 
organisms.
CONCEPT 3.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   99 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 101 ===

100 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
concentrations of solutions can vary by a factor of 100!trillion 
or more. Instead of using moles per liter, the pH scale 
compresses the range of H+ concentrations by employing 
logarithms. The pH of a solution is defined as the negative 
logarithm (base 10) of the  H+  concentration:
pH = -log [H+]
For a neutral aqueous solution, [H+] is 10-7 M, giving us
-log 10-7=-(-7)=7
Notice that pH decreases as H+ concentration increases (see 
Figure 3.11). Notice, too, that although the pH scale is based 
on H+ concentration, it also implies OH- concentration. 
A solution of pH 10 has a hydrogen ion concentration of 
10-10 M and a hydroxide ion concentration of 10-4 M.
The pH of a neutral aqueous solution at 25°C is 7, the mid-
point of the pH scale. A pH value less than 7 denotes an acidic 
solution; the lower the number, the more acidic the solution. The 
pH for basic solutions is above 7. Most biological fluids, such as 
blood and saliva, are within the range of pH 6–8. There are a few 
exceptions, however, including the strongly acidic digestive juice 
of the human stomach (gastric juice), which has a pH of about 2.
Remember that each pH unit represents a tenfold differ-
ence in H+ and OH- concentrations. It is this mathematical 
feature that makes the pH scale so compact. A solution of pH 
3 is not twice as acidic as a solution of pH 6, but 1,000 times 
(10 * 10 * 10) more acidic. When the pH of a solution 
changes slightly, the actual concentrations of H+ and OH- in 
the solution change substantially.
Buffers
The internal pH of most living cells is close to 7. Even a slight 
change in pH can be harmful because the chemical processes 
of the cell are very sensitive to the concentrations of hydro-
gen and hydroxide ions. The pH of human blood is very close 
to 7.4, which is slightly basic. A person cannot sur-
vive for more than a few minutes if the blood 
pH drops to 7 or rises to 7.8, and a chemical 
system exists in the blood that maintains a 
stable pH. If 0.01 mol of a strong acid is added 
to a liter of pure water, the pH drops from 7.0 
to 2.0. If the same amount of acid is added to a liter of 
blood, however, the pH decrease is only from 7.4 to 7.3. Why 
does the addition of acid have so much less of an effect on the 
pH of blood than it does on the pH of!water?
The presence of substances called buffers allows biological 
fluids to maintain a relatively constant pH despite the addi-
tion of acids or bases. A buffer is a substance that minimizes 
changes in the concentrations of H+ and OH- in a solution. It 
does so by accepting hydrogen ions from the solution when 
they are in excess and donating hydrogen ions to the solution 
when they have been depleted. Most buffer solutions con-
tain a weak acid and its corresponding base, which combine 
reversibly with hydrogen ions.
(The brackets indicate molar concentration.) As previously 
mentioned, in a neutral solution at 25°C, [H+] = 10-7 and 
[OH-] = 10-7. Therefore, the product of [H+] and [OH-] in 
a neutral solution at 25°C is 10-14. If enough acid is added 
to a solution to increase [H+] to 10-5 M, then [OH-] will 
decline by an equivalent factor to 10-9 M (note that 
10-5*10-9=10-14). This constant relationship expresses 
the behavior of acids and bases in an aqueous solution. An 
acid not only adds hydrogen ions to a solution, but also 
removes hydroxide ions because of the tendency for H+ to 
combine with OH-, forming water. A base has the opposite 
effect, increasing OH- concentration but also reducing H+ 
concentration by the formation of water. If enough of a base 
is added to raise the OH- concentration to 10-4 M, it will 
cause the H+ concentration to drop to 10-10 M. Whenever we 
know the concentration of either H+ or OH- in an aqueous 
solution, we can deduce the concentration of the other ion.
The pH scale (Figure 3.11) is a simple numerical method 
for expressing the range of H+ concentrations. The H+ 
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Oven cleaner
Household
bleach
Household ammonia
Milk of magnesia
Seawater
Inside small intestine                             
Pure water
Human blood, tears
Urine
Saliva
Rainwater
Tomato juice
Beer
Black coffee
Vinegar, wine, cola
Formic acid (from ants)
Gastric juice (in stomach)
Lemon juice
Battery acid
pH Scale
Neutral
[H+] = [OH–]
Increasingly Acidic
[H+] > [OH–]
Increasingly Basic
[H+] < [OH–]
Neutral
solution
Basic 
solution
Acidic 
solution
H1
H1H1
H1H1
H1
H1
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
OH2
H1
H1
H1
H1H1
H1H1
H1
OH2
OH2
. Figure 3.11 The pH scale and pH values of some aqueous 
solutions.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Acids, Bases, and pH
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   100 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 102 ===

 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 101
Several buffers contribute to pH stability in human blood 
and many other biological solutions. One of these is carbonic 
acid (H2CO3), which is formed when CO2 reacts with water in 
blood plasma. As mentioned earlier, carbonic acid dissociates 
to yield a bicarbonate ion (HCO3
-) and a hydrogen ion (H+):
                     Response to                
       a rise in pH                  
!
H2CO3   !   HCO3
 -   +   H+
H+ donor     Response to H + acceptor  Hydrogen
(acid)     a drop in pH (base) ion
The chemical equilibrium between carbonic acid and bicar-
bonate acts as a pH regulator, the reaction shifting left or 
right as other processes in the solution add or remove hydro-
gen ions. If the H+ concentration in blood begins to fall (that 
is, if pH rises), the reaction proceeds to the right and more 
carbonic acid dissociates, replenishing hydrogen ions. But 
when the H+ concentration in blood begins to rise (when 
pH drops), the reaction proceeds to the left, with HCO3   
- (the 
base) removing the hydrogen ions from the solution and 
forming H2CO3. Thus, the carbonic acid–bicarbonate buffer-
ing system consists of an acid and a base in equilibrium with 
each other. Most other buffers are also acid-base pairs.
Acidification: A Threat to Our Oceans
Among the many threats to water quality posed by human 
activities is the burning of fossil fuels, which releases CO2 into 
the atmosphere. The resulting increase in atmospheric CO2 
levels has caused global warming and other aspects of climate 
change (see Concept 56.4). In addition, about 25% of human-
generated CO2 is absorbed by the oceans. In spite of the 
huge volume of water in the oceans, scientists worry that the 
absorption of so much CO2 will harm marine ecosystems.
Recent data have shown that such fears are well founded. 
When CO2 dissolves in seawater, it reacts with water to 
form carbonic acid, which lowers ocean pH. This process, 
known as ocean acidification, alters the delicate balance 
of conditions for life in the oceans (Figure 3.12). Based on 
measurements of the CO2 level in air bubbles trapped in ice 
over  thousands of years, scientists calculate that the pH of 
the oceans is 0.1 pH unit lower (more acidic) now than at any 
time in the past 420,000 years. Recent studies predict that it 
will drop another 0.3–0.5 pH unit by the end of this century.
As seawater acidifies, the extra hydrogen ions combine with 
carbonate ions (CO3
2-) to form bicarbonate ions (HCO3
-),  
thereby reducing the carbonate ion concentration (see 
Figure 3.12). Scientists predict that ocean acidification will cause 
the carbonate ion concentration to decrease by 40%!by the 
year 2100. This is of great concern because carbonate ions are 
required for calcification, the production of calcium carbonate 
(CaCO3) by many marine organisms, including reef-building 
corals and animals that build shells. The Scientific!Skills Exercise 
allows you to work with data from an experiment examining 
the effect of carbonate ion concentration on coral reefs, using 
an artificial system. In 2018, researchers carried out the first 
CO2 enhancement study on an unconfined natural coral reef, 
observing that addition of CO2 suppressed calcification and 
concluding that ocean acidification is likely to cause “profound, 
ecosystem-wide changes in coral reefs.” Coral reefs are sensitive 
ecosystems that act as havens for a great diversity of marine life. 
The disappearance of coral reef ecosystems would be a tragic 
loss of biological diversity.
If there is any reason for optimism about the future qual-
ity of water resources on our planet, it is that we have made 
progress in learning about the delicate chemical balances 
in oceans, lakes, and rivers. Continued progress can come 
only from the actions of informed individuals, like your-
selves, who are concerned about environmental quality. This 
requires understanding the crucial role that water plays in the 
suitability of the environment for continued life on Earth.
CONCEPT CHECK 3.3
1. Compared with a basic solution at pH 9, the same volume 
of an acidic solution at pH 4 has ________ times as many 
hydrogen ions (H+).
2. Is the pH of 0.01 M HCl the same as that of 0.001 M HCl? 
Explain.
3. Acetic acid (CH3COOH) can be a buffer, similar to carbonic 
acid. Write the dissociation reaction, identifying the acid, 
base, H+ acceptor, and H+ donor.
4. WHAT IF? What would happen to a solution of acetic acid if 
a strong base like NaOH is added to it? Use the reaction from 
question 3 to explain the result.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CO2
CO2 + H2O H2CO3
Some carbon dioxide 
(CO2) in the atmo-
sphere dissolves in 
the ocean, where it 
reacts with water to 
form carbonic acid 
(H2CO3).
Carbonic acid 
dissociates into 
hydrogen ions (H+) 
and bicarbonate ions 
(HCO3–).
The added H+ 
combines with 
carbonate ions 
(CO32–), forming 
more HCO3–.
Less CO32– is avail-
able for calcification 
— the formation of 
calcium carbonate 
(CaCO3)— by marine 
organisms such as 
corals.
H2CO3 H+ HCO3–
 CO32–H+ HCO3–
+ CO32– Ca2+ CaCO3
+
+
. Figure 3.12 Atmospheric CO2 from human activities and its 
fate in the ocean.
VISUAL SKILLS Summarize the effect of adding excess CO2 to the 
oceans on the calcification process in the final equation.
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   101 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 103 ===

Interpreting a Scatter Plot  
with a Regression Line
How Does the Carbonate Ion Concentration of Seawater 
Affect the Calcification Rate of a Coral Reef? Scientists predict 
that acidification of the ocean due to higher levels of atmospheric 
CO2 will lower the concentration of dissolved carbonate ions, 
which living corals use to build calcium carbonate reef structures. 
In this exercise, you will analyze data from a controlled experiment 
that examined the effect of carbonate ion concentration ([CO3
2-]) 
on calcium carbonate deposition, a process called calcification.
How the Experiment Was Done For several years, scientists 
conducted research on ocean acidification using a large coral 
reef aquarium at Biosphere 2 in Arizona. They measured the rate 
of calcification by the reef organisms and examined how the 
calcification rate changed with differing amounts of dissolved 
carbonate ions in the seawater.
Data from the Experiment The black data points in the graph 
form a scatter plot. The red line, known as a linear regression 
line, is the best-fitting straight line for these points.
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. When presented with a graph of experimental data, the 
first!step in analysis is to determine what each axis repre-
sents. (a) In words, what is shown on the x-axis? (Include 
the!units.) (b) What is on the y-axis? (c) Which variable is the 
independent variable—the one that was manipulated by the 
researchers? (d) Which is the dependent variable—the one 
that responded to or depended on the treatment, which was 
measured by the researchers? (For additional information 
about graphs, see the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
2. Based on the data shown in the graph, describe in words the 
relationship between carbonate ion concentration and calcifi-
cation rate.
3. (a) If the seawater carbonate ion concentration is 270 µmol/kg, 
estimate the rate of calcification and how many days it would 
take!1 square meter of reef to accumulate 30 mmol of calcium 
carbonate (CaCO3). (b) If the seawater carbonate ion concentration 
is 250!µmol/kg, what is the approximate rate of calcification, and 
approximately how many days would it take 1 square meter of reef 
to accumulate 30 mmol of calcium carbonate? (c) If the carbon-
ate ion concentration decreases, how does the calcification rate 
change, and how does that affect the time it takes coral to grow?
4. (a) Which step of the process in Figure 3.12 is measured in this 
experiment? (b) Are the results of this experiment consistent 
with the hypothesis that increased atmospheric [CO2] will slow 
the growth of coral reefs? Why or why not?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Calcification rate 
[mmol CaCO3/(m2 • day)]
220 240 260 280
0
20
10
[CO3
2–] (omol/kg of seawater)
Data from C. Langdon et al., Effect of calcium carbonate saturation 
state on the calcification rate of an experimental coral reef, Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles 14:639–654 (2000).
DRAW IT Label a hydrogen bond and a polar covalent bond in the diagram 
of five water molecules. Is a hydrogen bond a covalent bond? Explain.
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the!Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
3 Chapter Review
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 3.1
Polar covalent bonds in water  
molecules result in hydrogen  
bonding (p. 93)
• Water is a polar molecule. A hydrogen 
bond forms when a partially nega-
tively charged region on the oxygen of 
one water molecule is attracted to the 
partially positively charged hydrogen of 
a nearby water molecule. Hydrogen bonding between water mol-
ecules is the basis for water’s properties.
H
O
H
f2
f2
f2
f1
f1
f1
f1
f2
CONCEPT 3.2
Four emergent properties of water contribute to 
Earth’s suitability for life (pp. 93–98)
• Hydrogen bonding keeps water molecules close to each other, 
giving water cohesion. Hydrogen bonding is also responsible for 
water’s surface tension.
• Water has a high specific heat: Heat is absorbed when hydrogen 
bonds break and is released when hydrogen bonds form. This 
helps keep temperatures relatively steady, within limits that 
permit life. Evaporative cooling is based on water’s high heat 
102 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   102 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 104 ===

7. Right before a predicted overnight freeze, farmers spray water 
on crops to protect the plants. Use the properties of water 
to explain how this method works. Be sure to mention why 
hydrogen bonds are responsible for this phenomenon.
8. MAKE CONNECTIONS What do climate change (see Concepts  
1.1 and 3.2) and ocean acidification have in!common?
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION This chapter explains how the 
emergent properties of water contribute to the suitability 
of the environment for life. Until fairly recently, scientists 
assumed that other physical requirements for life included 
a moderate range of temperature, pH, atmospheric pressure, 
and salinity, as well as low levels of toxic chemicals. That 
view has changed with the discovery of organisms known as 
extremophiles, which flourish in hot, acidic sulfur springs, 
around hydrothermal vents deep in the ocean, and in soils with 
high levels of toxic metals. Why would astrobiologists study 
extremophiles? What does the existence of life in such extreme 
environments say about the possibility of life on other planets?
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Design a controlled experiment to test 
the hypothesis that water acidification caused by acidic rain 
would inhibit the growth of Elodea, a freshwater plant (see 
Figure 2.17).
11. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION A sudden 
change in pH in a cell can be threatening to its survival. In a 
short essay (100–150 words), describe how a cell can resist pH 
changes.
12. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
How do cats drink? 
Scientists using high-
speed video have 
shown that cats use an 
interesting technique 
to drink aqueous 
substances like water 
and milk. Four times a 
second, the cat touches 
the tip of its tongue to 
the water and draws 
a column of water up 
into its mouth (as you 
can see in the photo), 
which then shuts 
before gravity can pull 
the water back down. Describe how the properties of water 
allow cats to drink in this fashion, including how water’s 
molecular structure contributes to the process.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
of vaporization. The evaporative loss of the most energetic 
water molecules cools a surface.
• Ice floats because it is less dense than liquid water. This property 
allows life to exist under the frozen surfaces of lakes and polar 
seas.
• Water is an unusually versatile solvent because its polar mol-
ecules are attracted to ions and polar substances that can form 
hydrogen bonds. Hydrophilic substances have an affinity for 
water; hydrophobic substances do not. Molarity, the number 
of moles of solute per liter of solution, is used as a measure of 
solute concentration in solutions. A mole is a certain number 
of molecules of a substance. The mass of a mole of a substance in 
grams is the same as the molecular mass in daltons.
• The emergent properties of water support life on Earth and may 
contribute to the potential for life to have evolved on other planets.
? Describe how different types of solutes dissolve in water. Explain 
what a solution is.
CONCEPT 3.3
Acidic and basic conditions affect living  
organisms (pp. 99–102)
• A water molecule can transfer an H+ to another water molecule to 
form H3O+ (represented simply by H+) and OH-.
• The concentration of H+ is ex-
pressed as pH; pH = -log [H+].  
A buffer consists of an acid-
base pair that combines revers-
ibly with hydrogen ions, allow-
ing it to resist pH changes.
• The burning of fossil fuels 
increases the amount of CO2 
in the atmosphere. Some CO2 
dissolves in the oceans, causing 
ocean acidification, which 
has potentially grave conse-
quences for marine organisms 
that rely on calcification.
? Explain what happens to the concentration of hydrogen ions in an 
aqueous solution when you add a base and cause the concentration of 
OH- to rise to 10-3. What is the pH of this solution?
14
Acids donate H+ in
aqueous solutions.
Bases donate OH–
or accept H+ in
aqueous solutions.
7
0
Neutral
[H+] = [OH–]
Acidic
[H+] > [OH–]
Basic
[H+] < [OH–]
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. DRAW IT Draw the hydration shells that form around a 
potassium ion and a chloride ion when potassium chloride 
(KCl) dissolves. Label the positive, negative, and partial charges.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How are coral reefs responding to climate change?
Go to “Take the Heat” at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
 CHAPTER 3  The Chemistry of Water 103
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C03_PRF.indd   103 3/13/20   11:54 PM

=== SIDE 105 ===

Figure 4.1 The Qinling golden snub-nosed monkeys and other living organisms 
in this mountainous forest in southwest China are made up of chemicals based 
mostly on the element carbon. Of all chemical elements, carbon is unparalleled in 
its ability to form molecules that are large, complex, and varied, making possible 
the!diversity of organisms that have evolved on Earth.
Carbon: The Basis of Molecular 
Diversity4
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 4
• Animation: Diversity of Carbon-Based 
Molecules
• Animation: Functional Groups
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: Isomers
• Tutorial: Carbon Bonding and Functional 
Groups
Study Tip
Label chemical groups: After you have 
read through Figure 4.9, look through 
Chapters 4 and 5 for molecules that have 
the chemical groups shown in that figure. 
Circle and label the chemical groups you 
find, as in the following example:
4.1 Organic chemistry is key to the 
origin!of life p. 105
4.2 Carbon atoms can form diverse 
molecules by bonding to four 
other!atoms p. 106
4.3 A few chemical groups are key 
to!molecular function p. 110
KEY CONCEPTS
What makes carbon the basis for 
all biological molecules?
Carbon can form four bonds, 
and therefore can bond to up to four 
other atoms or groups of atoms.
Carbon can bond to other carbons, 
resulting in carbon skeletons. Carbon 
also commonly bonds to
The properties of a carbon-containing 
molecule depend on the arrangement 
of its carbon skeleton and on its 
chemical groups.
The signaling molecule shown 
here, dopamine, has many 
functions, including promoting 
mother-infant bonding.
C
H
O
N
oxygen, and
nitrogen.
hydrogen,
Carbon skeleton
Chemical groups
OH
CH3
HO
OH
CH3
O
CH3
Estradiol Testosterone
Methyl groups
Hydroxyl groups
Carboxyl group
104
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   104 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 106 ===

 CHAPTER 4  Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 105
Organic chemistry is key to the 
origin of life
For historical reasons, compounds containing carbon are said 
to be organic, and their study is called organic chemistry. 
Organic compounds range from simple molecules, such  
as methane (CH4), to colossal ones, such as proteins, with 
thousands of atoms.
EVOLUTION In 1953, Stanley Miller, a graduate student 
of Harold Urey at the University of Chicago, designed 
an experiment on the abiotic (nonliving) synthesis of 
organic compounds to investigate the origin of life. Study 
Figure!4.2 to learn about his classic experiment. From his 
results, Miller concluded that complex organic molecules 
could arise spontaneously under conditions thought at 
that time to have existed on early Earth. You can work 
with the data from a related experiment in the Scientific 
Skills Exercise. These experiments support the idea that 
abiotic synthesis of organic compounds, perhaps near vol -
canoes, could have been an early stage in the origin of life 
(see Figure 25.2).
In Concept 3.2, you learned about evidence for the presence 
of water on Mars. Even more exciting, in 2018, NASA reported 
that the rover Curiosity had found carbon-based compounds 
on Mars in a crater where a lake once existed. While these com-
pounds might have been brought to Mars on a meteorite or 
formed by geologic processes, an intriguing possibility is that 
they might have been the relics of life-forms that once existed 
on that planet.
The overall percentages of the major elements of life—C, 
H, O, N, S, and P—are quite uniform from one organism to 
another, reflecting the common evolutionary origin of all 
life. Because of carbon’s ability to form four bonds, however, 
this limited assortment of atomic building blocks can be 
used to build an inexhaustible variety of organic molecules. 
Different species of organisms, and different individuals 
within a species, are distinguished by variations in the types 
of organic molecules they make. In a sense, the great diver-
sity of living organisms we see on the planet (and in fossil 
remains) is made possible by the unique chemical versatility 
of the carbon atom.
CONCEPT 4.1
H2O
“sea”
Sample for
chemical analysis
Cooled “rain”
containing
organic
molecules
Condenser
Cold
water
Water vapor
Electrode
CH4
NH3H2
“Atmosphere” 
2     The “atmosphere” 
contained a mixture of 
hydrogen gas (H2), methane 
(CH4), ammonia (NH3), and 
water vapor.
     The water 
mixture in the 
”sea” flask was 
heated; vapor 
entered the 
”atmosphere” 
flask.
     Sparks were 
discharged to mimic 
lightning.
3
     As material cycled 
through the apparatus, 
Miller periodically collected 
samples for analysis.
     A condenser cooled 
the atmosphere, raining 
water and dissolved 
molecules into the sea flask.
1
5 4
. Figure 4.2 Inquiry
Results Miller identified a variety of organic molecules 
that are common in organisms. These included simple com-
pounds, such as formaldehyde (CH2O) and hydrogen cyanide 
(HCN), and more complex molecules, such as amino acids and 
long chains of carbon and hydrogen known as hydrocarbons.
Conclusion Organic molecules, a first step in the origin 
of life, may have been synthesized abiotically on the early 
Earth. Although later evidence indicated that the early-Earth 
atmosphere was different from the “atmosphere” used by 
Miller in this experiment, recent experiments using the re-
vised list of chemicals also produced organic molecules. (We 
will explore this hypothesis in more detail in Concept 25.1.)
Data from S. L. Miller, A production of amino acids under possible primitive 
Earth conditions, Science 117:528–529 (1953).
WHAT IF? If Miller had increased the concentration of NH3 in his 
experiment, how might the relative amounts of the products HCN  
and CH2O have differed?
Can organic molecules form under conditions 
estimated to simulate those on the early Earth?
Experiment In 1953, Stanley Miller set up a closed system 
to mimic conditions thought at that time to have existed on 
the early Earth. A flask of water simulated the primeval sea. 
The water was heated so that some vaporized and moved 
into a second, higher flask containing the “atmosphere”—a 
mixture of gases. Sparks were discharged in the synthetic 
 a t m o s p h e r e  t o  m i m i c  l i g h t n i n g .
 Mastering Biology
Interview with Stanley Miller: 
Investigating the origin of life
CONCEPT CHECK 4.1
1. VISUAL SKILLS See Figure 4.2. Miller carried out a con-
trol experiment without discharging sparks and found no 
organic compounds. What might explain this result?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   105 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 107 ===

106 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Could the First Biological Molecules Have Formed Near 
Volcanoes on Early Earth? I n  2 0 0 7 ,  J e f f r e y  B a d a ,  a  f o r m e r  g r a d-
uate student of Stanley Miller, discovered some vials of samples 
that had never been analyzed from an experiment performed by 
Miller in 1958. In that experiment, Miller used hydrogen sulfide 
gas (H2S) as one of the gases in the reactant mixture. Since H2S is 
released by volcanoes, the H2S experiment was designed to mimic 
conditions near volcanoes on early Earth. In 2011, Bada and col-
leagues published the results of their analysis of these “lost” sam-
ples. In this exercise, you will make calculations using the molar 
ratios of reactants and products from the H2S experiment.
How the Experiment Was Done According to his laboratory 
notebook, Miller used the same apparatus as in his original experi-
ment (see Figure 4.2), but the mixture of gaseous reactants included 
methane (CH4), carbon dioxide (CO2), hydrogen sulfide (H2S), and 
ammonia (NH3). After three days of simulated volcanic activity, he 
collected samples of the liquid, partially purified the chemicals, and 
sealed the samples in sterile vials. In 2011, Bada’s research team 
used modern analytical methods to analyze the products in the vials 
for the presence of amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
Data from the Experiment The table below shows 4 of the 
23 amino acids detected in the 2011 analysis of the samples 
from Miller’s 1958 H2S experiment.
Product Compound
Molecular 
Formula
Molar Ratio 
(Relative!to Glycine)
Glycine C2H5NO2 1.0
Serine C3H7NO3 3.0*10-2
Methionine C5H11NO2S 1.8*10-3
Alanine C3H7NO2 1.1
Data from E. T. Parker et al., Primordial synthesis of amines and amino acids in 
a 1958 Miller H2S-rich spark discharge experiment, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 108:5526-5531 (2011). www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/
pnas.1019191108.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. A mole is the number of particles of a substance with a mass 
equivalent to its molecular (or atomic) mass in daltons. There 
are 6.02*1023 molecules (or atoms) in 1.0 mole (Avogadro’s 
number; see Concept 3.2). The data table shows the “molar 
ratios” of some of the products from the Miller H2S experiment. 
In a molar ratio, each unitless value is expressed relative to a 
standard for that experiment. Here, the standard is the number 
Working with Moles and Molar Ratios
of moles of the amino acid glycine, which is set to a value of 
1.0. For instance, serine has a molar ratio of 3.0*10-2, mean-
ing that for every mole of glycine, there is 3.0*10-2 mole of 
serine. (a) Give the molar ratio of methionine to glycine and 
explain what it means. (b) How many molecules of glycine 
are present in 1.0 mole? (c) For every 1.0 mole of glycine in 
the sample, how many molecules of methionine are present? 
(Recall that to multiply two numbers with exponents, you add 
their exponents; to divide them, you subtract the exponent in 
the denominator from that in the numerator.)
2. (a) Which amino acid is present in higher amounts than glycine? 
(b) How many more molecules of that amino acid are present 
than the number of molecules in 1.0 mole of glycine?
3. The synthesis of products is limited by the amount of reactants. 
(a) If one mole each of CH4, NH3, H2S, and CO2 is added to 1 liter 
of water (= 55.5 moles of H2O) in a flask, how many moles of hy-
drogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur are in the flask?  
(b) Looking at the molecular formula in the table, how many 
moles of each element would be needed to make 1.0 mole of 
glycine? (c) What is the maximum number of moles of glycine 
that could be made in that flask, with the specified ingredients, if 
no other molecules were made? Explain. (d) If serine or methio-
nine were made individually, which element(s) would be used up 
first for each? How much of each product could be made?
4. The earlier published experiment carried out by Miller did not 
include H2S in the reactants (see Figure 4.2). Which of the com-
pounds shown in the data table can be made in the H2S experi-
ment but could not be made in the earlier experiment?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
m Some of Stanley Miller’s notes from his 1958 hydrogen 
 sulfide (H2S) experiment along with his original vials.
CONCEPT 4.2
Carbon atoms can form diverse  
molecules by bonding to four  
other atoms
The key to an atom’s chemical characteristics is its electron 
configuration. This configuration determines the kinds and 
number of bonds an atom will form with other atoms. Recall 
that it is the valence electrons, those in the outermost shell, 
that are available to form bonds with other atoms.
The Formation of Bonds with Carbon
Carbon has 6 electrons, with 2 in the first electron shell and 4 
in the second shell; thus, it has 4 valence electrons in a shell 
that can hold up to 8 electrons. A carbon atom usually com-
pletes its valence shell by sharing its 4 electrons with other 
atoms so that 8 electrons are present. Each pair of shared elec-
trons constitutes a covalent bond (see Figure 2.10d). In organic 
molecules, carbon usually forms single or double covalent 
bonds. Each carbon atom acts as an intersection point from 
which a molecule can branch off in as many as four directions. 
This enables carbon to form large, complex molecules.
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   106 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 108 ===

 CHAPTER 4  Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 107
Molecular
Formula
Structural
Formula
Ball-and-Stick Model
(molecular shape in pink)
Space-Filling
Model
C2H6
C2H4
CH4 C
H
H
HH
C
H
H
CH H
H
H
CC
H
H
H
H
(a) Methane. When a carbon 
atom has four single bonds to 
other atoms, the molecule is 
tetrahedral.
(b) Ethane. A molecule may have 
more than one tetrahedral 
group of single-bonded 
atoms. (Ethane consists of
two such groups.) 
(c) Ethene (ethylene). When 
two carbon atoms are joined 
by a double bond, all atoms 
attached to those carbons 
are in the same plane, and 
the molecule is flat.
Molecule and Molecular Shape
. Figure 4.3 The shapes of three simple organic molecules.
In the carbon dioxide molecule (CO2), a single carbon 
atom is joined to two atoms of oxygen by double covalent 
bonds. The structural formula for CO2 is shown here:
O“C“O
Each line in a structural formula represents a pair of shared 
electrons. Thus, the two double bonds in CO2 have the same 
number of shared electrons as four single bonds. The arrange-
ment completes the valence shells of all atoms in the molecule:
O OC
When a carbon atom forms four single covalent bonds, 
the arrangement of its four hybrid orbitals causes the bonds 
to angle toward the corners of an imaginary tetrahedron. 
The bond angles in methane (CH4) are 109.5° (Figure 4.3a), 
and they are roughly the same in any group of atoms where 
carbon has four single bonds. For example, ethane (C2H6) is 
shaped like two overlapping tetrahedrons (Figure 4.3b). In 
molecules with more carbons, every grouping of a carbon 
bonded to four other atoms has a tetrahedral shape. But when 
two carbon atoms are joined by a double bond, as in ethene 
(C2H4), the bonds from both carbons are all in the same 
plane, so the atoms joined to those carbons are in the same 
plane as well (Figure 4.3c). We find it convenient to write 
molecules as structural formulas, as if the molecules being 
represented are two-dimensional, but keep in mind that mol-
ecules are three-dimensional and that the shape of a molecule 
is central to its function.
The number of electrons required to fill the valence shell 
of an atom is generally equal to the atom’s valence, the 
number of covalent bonds it can form. Figure 4.4 shows  
the valences of carbon and its most frequent bonding 
partners—hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. These are the 
four main atoms in organic molecules.
The electron configuration of carbon gives it covalent 
compatibility with many different elements. Let’s consider 
how valence and the rules of covalent bonding apply to car-
bon atoms with partners other than hydrogen. We’ll look  
at two examples, the simple molecules carbon dioxide  
and urea.
NH O C
HydrogenOxygen
Electron distribution diagram 
with red circles showing 
electrons needed to fill the 
valence shell
Lewis dot structure showing 
existing valence electrons
Number of electrons needed 
to fill the valence shell 1 2
Valence: Number of bonds 
the element can form 1 2
Nitrogen Carbon
3
3
4
4
H• O•
••
•
••
•
N••
•
•
•
C•••
. Figure 4.4 Valences of the major elements of organic 
molecules. Valence, the number of covalent bonds an atom can 
form, is generally equal to the number of electrons required to fill 
the valence shell. (Sodium, phosphorus, and chlorine are exceptions.)
MAKE CONNECTIONS Draw the Lewis dot structures for sodium, 
silicon, phosphorus, sulfur, and chlorine. (Refer to Figure 2.7.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   107 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 109 ===

108 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Although hydrocarbons are not prevalent in most living 
organisms, some of a cell’s organic molecules have regions 
consisting of only carbon and hydrogen. For example, the mol-
ecules known as fats have long hydrocarbon tails attached to a 
nonhydrocarbon component (Figure 4.6). Neither petroleum 
nor fat dissolves in water; both are hydrophobic compounds 
because the great majority of their bonds are relatively non-
polar carbon-to-hydrogen linkages. Another characteristic of 
hydrocarbons is that they can undergo reactions that release 
a relatively large amount of energy. The gasoline that fuels a 
car consists of hydrocarbons, and the hydrocarbon tails of fats 
serve as stored fuel for plant embryos (seeds) and animals.
Because CO2 is a very simple molecule and lacks hydrogen, 
it is often considered inorganic, even though it contains car-
bon. Whether we call CO2 organic or inorganic, however, it is 
clearly important to the living world as the source of carbon, 
via photosynthetic organisms, for all organic molecules in 
organisms (see Concept 2.4).
Urea, CO1NH222, is an organic 
compound found in urine. Again, 
each atom has the required number of 
covalent bonds. In this case, one carbon 
atom participates in both single and 
double bonds.
Urea and carbon dioxide are molecules 
with only one carbon atom. But a carbon atom can also use 
one or more valence electrons to form covalent bonds to 
other carbon atoms, linking the atoms into chains, as shown 
here for C3H8:
H
H
H HC
H
H
C
H
H
C
Molecular Diversity Arising from  
Variation in Carbon Skeletons
Carbon chains form the basis of most organic molecules. 
Carbon skeletons vary in length and may be straight, 
branched, or arranged in closed rings (Figure 4.5). Some car-
bon chains have double bonds, which vary in number and 
location. Such variation in carbon chains is one important 
source of the molecular complexity and diversity that char-
acterize living matter. In addition, the skeletons of biological 
molecules often include atoms of other elements, like oxygen 
and phosphorus; such atoms can also be bonded to carbons 
of the skeleton.
Hydrocarbons
All of the molecules that are shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.5 
are hydrocarbons, organic molecules consisting of only 
carbon and hydrogen. Atoms of hydrogen are attached to the 
carbon skeleton wherever electrons are available for covalent 
bonding. Hydrocarbons are the major components of petro-
leum, which is called a fossil fuel because it consists of the 
partially decomposed remains of organisms that lived mil-
lions of years ago.
H
C
H
C
H
H
H HH
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
C
C
C
H H
H
CC
C
H
H
H
Ethane Propane
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H H
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
CHH
H
Butane 2-Methylpropane
(commonly called isobutane)
H
H
CC
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H H
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
1-Butene 2-Butene
Cyclohexane Benzene
CH
H
H
H
H
H
H
HC
C
C
HH
HH
C
C
(a) Length
Carbon skeletons vary in length.
Skeletons may be unbranched or branched.
The skeleton may have double bonds, which can vary in location.
Some carbon skeletons are arranged in rings. In the abbreviated 
structural formula for each compound (to its right), each corner 
represents a carbon and its attached hydrogens.
(b) Branching
(c) Double bond position
(d) Presence of rings
. Figure 4.5 Four ways that carbon skeletons can vary.
C
H
N
HH
H
N
O
Urea
 Mastering Biology Animation: Diversity of  
Carbon-Based Molecules
 Mastering Biology Interview with  
Deborah Gordon: Studying How Ants Use 
Hydrocarbons to Communicate
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   108 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 110 ===

 CHAPTER 4  Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 109
with the Xs on opposite sides is called a trans isomer. The subtle 
difference in shape between such isomers can have a dramatic 
effect on the biological activities of organic molecules. For 
example, the biochemistry of vision involves a light-induced 
change of retinal, a chemical compound in the eye, from 
the cis isomer to the trans isomer (see Figure 50.17). Another 
example involves trans fats, harmful fats formed during food 
processing that are discussed in Concept 5.3.
Enantiomers are isomers that are mirror images of 
each other and that differ in shape due to the presence of 
an asymmetric carbon, one that is attached to four different 
atoms or groups of atoms. (See the middle carbon in the ball-
and-stick models shown in Figure 4.7c.) The four groups can 
Isomers
Variation in the architecture of organic molecules can be 
seen in isomers, compounds that have the same numbers of 
atoms of the same elements but different structures and hence 
different properties. We will examine three types of isomers: 
structural isomers, cis-trans isomers, and enantiomers.
Structural isomers differ in the covalent arrangements of 
their atoms. Compare, for example, the two five-carbon com-
pounds in Figure 4.7a. Both have the molecular formula C5H12, 
but they differ in the covalent arrangement of their carbon skel-
etons. The skeleton is straight in one compound but branched 
in the other. The number of possible isomers increases tremen-
dously as carbon skeletons increase in size. There are only three 
forms of C5H12 (two of which are shown in Figure 4.7a), but 
there are 18 variants of C8H18 and 366,319 possible structural 
isomers of C20H42. Structural isomers may also differ in the 
location of double bonds.
In cis-trans isomers (also known as geometric isomers), car-
bons have covalent bonds to the same atoms, but these atoms 
differ in their spatial arrangements due to the inflexibility of 
double bonds. Single bonds allow the atoms they join to rotate 
freely about the bond axis without changing the compound. In 
contrast, double bonds do not permit such rotation. If a double 
bond joins two carbon atoms, and each C also has two differ-
ent atoms (or groups of atoms) attached to it, then two distinct 
cis-trans isomers are possible. Consider a simple molecule with 
two double-bonded carbons, each of which has an H and an X 
attached to it (Figure 4.7b). The arrangement with both Xs on 
the same side of the double bond is called a cis isomer, and that 
Fat droplets 
Nucleus
(a) Part of a human adipose cell (b) A fat molecule
10 om
. Figure 4.6 The role of hydrocarbons in fats.  
(a) Mammalian adipose cells stockpile fat molecules as a fuel reserve.  
This colorized micrograph shows part of a human adipose cell with 
many fat droplets, each containing a large number of fat molecules. 
(b) A fat molecule consists of a small, nonhydrocarbon component 
joined to three hydrocarbon tails that account for the hydrophobic 
behavior of fats. The tails can be broken down to provide energy.  
(Black = carbon; gray = hydrogen; red = oxygen.)
CO2H
NH2
CH3
X
H
C
H
H
HC
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H C
H
H
HC
H
C
H
C
H
HH
H
H
H
CH
H
CC
X X
HX
CC
H
CH3
HNH2
CO2H
H
C C
(a) Structural isomers
(b) Cis-trans isomers (also known as geometric isomers)
(c) Enantiomers
Structural isomers differ in the arrangement of covalent 
bonding partners, as shown in these two isomers of C5H12.
cis isomer: trans isomer:
Cis-trans isomers differ in arrangement about a double bond. In 
these diagrams, X represents an atom or group of atoms attached 
to a double-bonded carbon.
Enantiomers differ in spatial arrangement around an asymmetric 
carbon, resulting in molecules that are mirror images, like left and 
right hands. The two isomers here are designated the L and D 
isomers from the Latin for “left” and ”right” (levo and dextro). 
Enantiomers cannot be superimposed on each other.
L isomer
Pentane 2-Methylbutane
D isomer
The two Xs are on 
the same side.
The two Xs are on 
opposite sides.
. Figure 4.7 Three types of isomers. Isomers are compounds 
that have the same molecular formula but different structures.
MAKE CONNECTIONS How do the tails account for the hydrophobic 
nature of fats? (See Concept 3.2.)
DRAW IT There are three structural isomers of C5H12; draw the one not 
shown in (a).
 Mastering Biology Animation: Isomers
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   109 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 111 ===

110 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
be arranged in space around the asymmetric carbon in two 
different ways that are mirror images. Enantiomers are, in a 
way, left-handed and right-handed versions of the molecule. 
Just as your right hand won’t fit into a left-handed glove, a 
“right-handed” molecule won’t fit into the same space as the 
“left-handed” version. Usually, only one isomer is biologically 
active because only that form can bind to specific molecules in 
an organism.
The concept of enantiomers is important in the phar-
maceutical industry because the two enantiomers of a drug 
may not be equally effective, as is the case for both ibu-
profen and the asthma medication albuterol (Figure 4.8). 
Methamphetamine also occurs in two enantiomers that 
have very different effects. One enantiomer is the highly 
addictive stimulant drug known as “crank,” sold illegally 
in the street drug trade. The other has a much weaker effect 
and is the active ingredient in an over-the-counter vapor 
inhaler for treatment of nasal congestion. The differing 
effects of enantiomers in the body demonstrate that organ-
isms are sensitive to even the subtlest variations in molecu-
lar architecture. Once again, we see that molecules have 
emergent properties that depend on the specific arrange-
ment of their atoms.
Drug Effects Effective
Enantiomer
Ineffective
Enantiomer
Albuterol
Ibuprofen
Reduces 
inflammation
and pain
S-Ibuprofen R-Ibuprofen
R-Albuterol S-Albuterol
Relaxes bronchial 
(airway) muscles, 
improving airflow 
in asthma 
patients
. Figure 4.8 The pharmacological importance of enantiomers. 
Ibuprofen and albuterol are drugs whose enantiomers have different 
effects. (S and R are used here to distinguish between enantiomers, 
rather than D and L as in  Figure 4.7c.) Ibuprofen is commonly sold as 
a mixture of the two enantiomers; the S enantiomer is 100 times more 
effective than the R form. Albuterol is synthesized and sold only as the 
R form of that drug; the S form counteracts the active R form.
CONCEPT 4.3
A few chemical groups are key  
to molecular function
The distinctive properties of an organic molecule depend not 
only on the arrangement of its mostly carbon skeleton but 
also on the various chemical groups attached to that skeleton. 
These groups may participate in chemical reactions or may 
contribute to function indirectly by their effects on molecular 
shape; they help give each molecule its unique properties.
The Chemical Groups Most Important  
in the Processes of Life
Consider the differences between estradiol (a type of estrogen) 
and testosterone. These compounds are female and male sex hor-
mones, respectively, in humans and other vertebrates. Both are 
steroids, organic molecules with a common carbon skeleton in the 
form of four fused rings. They differ only in the chemical groups 
attached to the rings (shown here in abbreviated form, where each 
corner represents a carbon and its attached hydrogens); the dis-
tinctions in molecular architecture are shaded in blue:
OH
CH3
HO
OH
CH3
O
CH3
Estradiol Testosterone
The different actions of these two molecules on many targets 
throughout the body are the basis of sexual characteristics, pro-
ducing the contrasting features of male and female vertebrates. 
In this case, the chemical groups are important because they 
affect molecular shape, contributing to function.
In other cases, chemical groups are directly involved in 
chemical reactions; such groups are known as functional 
groups. Each has certain properties, such as shape and  
charge, that cause it to participate in chemical reactions in a 
characteristic way.
The seven chemical groups most important in biological 
processes are the hydroxyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, sulfhy-
dryl, phosphate, and methyl groups. The first six groups can 
be chemically reactive; of these six, all except the sulfhydryl 
group are also hydrophilic and thus increase the solubility of 
organic compounds in water. The methyl group is not reac-
tive, but instead often serves as a recognizable tag on biologi-
cal molecules. Study Figure 4.9 to become familiar with these 
biologically important chemical groups. As shown at the right 
of the figure, the carboxyl group and the amino group are 
 ionized at normal cellular pH.
CONCEPT CHECK 4.2
1. DRAW IT (a) Draw a structural formula for C2H4. (b) Draw 
the trans isomer of C2H2Cl2.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Which two pairs of molecules in Figure 4.5 
are isomers? For each pair, identify the type of isomer.
3. How are gasoline and fat chemically similar?
4. VISUAL SKILLS See Figures 4.5a and 4.7. Can propane (C3H8) 
form isomers? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   110 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 112 ===

 CHAPTER 4  Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 111
Is polar due to electronegative oxygen. 
Forms hydrogen bonds with water, 
helping dissolve compounds such as 
sugars. 
Compound name: Alcohol (specific 
name usually ends in -ol) 
Sugars with ketone groups are called 
ketoses; those with aldehydes are called 
aldoses.
Compound name: Ketone (carbonyl 
group is within a carbon skeleton) or 
aldehyde (carbonyl group is at the end of a 
carbon skeleton) 
Acts as an acid (can donate H+) because 
the covalent bond between oxygen and 
hydrogen is so polar.
Compound name: Carboxylic acid, or 
organic acid
Acts as a base; can pick up an H+ from 
the surrounding solution (water, in living 
organisms).
Compound name: Amine
Two — SH groups can react, forming a 
“cross-link” that helps stabilize protein 
structure. Hair protein cross-links maintain 
the straightness or curliness of hair; in hair 
salons, “permanent” treatments break 
cross-links, then re-form them while the 
hair is in the desired shape.
Compound name: Thiol
Contributes negative charge (1– when 
positioned inside a chain of phosphates; 
2– when at the end). When attached, 
confers on a molecule the ability to react 
with water, releasing energy.
Compound name: Organic phosphate
Affects the expression of genes when 
bonded to DNA or to proteins that bind 
to DNA. Affects the shape and function 
of male and female sex hormones.
Compound name: Methylated 
compound
(may be written HO    )
OH
OH
H
CH
H
H
C OH
H
O
C
HH
H
CH C
H
H
C
H
H
CH HC
H
H
C
O
+C
O
O–
H+
+H+
Ionized form of     COOH
(carboxylate ion),
found in cells
CC
H
H
H
O
OHC
COOH
O
OH
H+N
H
H
N
H
H
NC
H
H
H
C
HO H
O
(may be written HS     )
SH CH2 SH
HH
HC
C
N
O OH
OP
O–
O– OC P
O–
OO
CCH O–
H OH OH
HH H
HC
H
H
C
C
C
C
HON
H
NH2
CH3
N
Ethanol, the alcohol present
in alcoholic beverages
Acetone, the simplest ketone
Acetic acid, which gives
vinegar its sour taste
Glycine, an amino acid
(note its carboxyl group)
Cysteine, a sulfur-
containing amino acid
Glycerol phosphate, which
takes part in many important
chemical reactions in cells
Ionized form of     NH2,
found in cells
Propanal, an aldehyde
O
Chemical Group Group Properties
and Compound Name Examples
Hydroxyl group (          )
Carboxyl group (               )
Amino group (     NH2)
Methyl group (     CH3)
Sulfhydryl group (    SH)
Phosphate group (    OPO32–)
Carbonyl group (    C     O)
5-Methylcytosine: Cytosine, 
a component of DNA, has
been modified by addition of
a methyl group.
. Figure 4.9 Some biologically important chemical groups.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Functional Groups
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   111 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 113 ===

 Go to MasteringBiology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
Carbon atoms can form diverse molecules by bonding 
to four other atoms (pp. 106–110)
• Carbon, with a valence of 4, can bond to various other atoms, 
including O, H, and N. Carbon can also bond to other carbon 
atoms, forming the carbon skeletons of organic compounds. 
These skeletons vary in length and shape and have bonding sites 
for atoms of other elements.
The Chemical Elements of Life: A Review
Living matter, as you have learned, consists mainly of carbon, 
oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, with smaller amounts of 
sulfur and phosphorus. These elements all form strong cova-
lent bonds, an essential characteristic in the architecture of 
complex organic molecules. Of all these elements, carbon 
is the virtuoso of the covalent bond. The versatility of car-
bon makes possible the great diversity of organic molecules, 
each with particular properties that emerge from the unique 
arrangement of its mostly carbon skeleton and the chemi-
cal groups attached to that skeleton. This variation at the 
molecular level provides the foundation for the rich biologi-
cal diversity found on our planet.
ATP: An Important Source of Energy  
for Cellular Processes
The “Phosphate group” row in Figure 4.9 shows a simple 
example of an organic phosphate molecule. A more compli-
cated organic phosphate, adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, 
is worth mentioning here because its function in the cell is so 
important. ATP consists of an organic molecule called adenos-
ine attached to a string of three phosphate groups:
Adenosine
O– O– O–
O
OOO
P–OO P P O
Where three phosphates are present in series, as in ATP, one 
phosphate may be split off as a result of a reaction with water. 
This inorganic phosphate ion, HOPO2-
3 , is often abbrevi-
ated    P  i in this book, and a phosphate group in an organic 
molecule is often written as    P  . Having lost one phosphate, 
ATP becomes adenosine diphosphate, or ADP. Although ATP 
is sometimes said to store energy, it is more accurate to think 
of it as storing the potential to react with water or other mol-
ecules. Overall, the process releases energy that can be used 
by the cell. You’ll learn more about this in Concept 6.3.
P P P Adenosine
ATP ADP Inorganic
phosphate
Reacts
with H2O
PP ++ EnergyAdenosine Pi
CONCEPT CHECK 4.3
1. VISUAL SKILLS What does the term amino acid 
 signify!about the structure of such a molecule? See 
Figure!4.9.
2. What chemical change occurs to ATP when it reacts with 
water and releases energy?
3. DRAW IT Suppose you had an organic molecule such  
as cysteine (see Figure 4.9, sulfhydryl group example),  
and you chemically removed the —NH2 group and  
replaced it with —COOH. Draw this structure. How 
would!this change the chemical properties of the 
 molecule?!Is the central carbon asymmetric before  
the change? After?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 4.1
Organic chemistry is key to the origin of life (pp. 105–106)
• Organic compounds, once thought to arise only within living 
organisms, were finally synthesized in the laboratory.
• Living matter is made mostly of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and 
nitrogen. Biological diversity results from carbon’s ability to form a 
huge number of molecules with particular shapes and properties.
?  How did Stanley Miller’s experiments support the idea that, even at 
life’s origins, physical and chemical laws govern the processes of life?
CONCEPT 4.2
• Hydrocarbons consist of carbon and hydrogen.
• Isomers are compounds that have the same molecular formula 
but different structures and therefore different properties. Three 
types of isomers are structural isomers, cis-trans isomers, 
and enantiomers.
VISUAL SKILLS Refer back to Figure 4.9. What type of isomers are acetone 
and propanal? How many asymmetric carbons are present in acetic acid, 
glycine, and glycerol phosphate? Can these three molecules exist as forms 
that are enantiomers?
CONCEPT 4.3
A few chemical groups are key to molecular  
function (pp. 110–112)
• Chemical groups attached to the carbon skeletons of organic 
molecules participate in chemical reactions (functional 
groups) or contribute to function by affecting molecular shape 
(see Figure 4.9).
• ATP (adenosine triphosphate) consists of adenosine at-
tached to three phosphate groups. ATP can react with water or 
other molecules, forming ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and in-
organic phosphate. This reaction releases energy that can be used 
by the cell.
4 Chapter Review
112 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   112 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 114 ===

 CHAPTER 4  Carbon: The Basis of Molecular Diversity 113
11. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION In 1918, 
an epidemic of sleeping sickness caused an unusual rigid 
paralysis in some survivors, similar to symptoms of advanced 
Parkinson’s disease. Y ears later, L-dopa (below, left), a chemical 
used to treat Parkinson’s disease, was given to some of these 
patients. L-dopa was remarkably effective at eliminating the 
paralysis, at least temporarily. However, its enantiomer, D-dopa 
(right), was subsequently shown to have no effect at all, as is the 
case for Parkinson’s disease. In a short essay (100–150 words), 
discuss how the effectiveness of one enantiomer and not the 
other illustrates the theme of structure and function.
P P P Adenosine
ATP ADP Inorganic
phosphate
Reacts
with H2O
PP ++ EnergyAdenosine Pi
?  In what ways does a methyl group differ chemically from the other 
six important chemical groups shown in Figure 4.9?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. Which of the following molecules has an asymmetric carbon? 
Which carbon is asymmetric?
L-dopa D-dopa
Explain how the 
chemical structure 
of the carbon atom 
accounts for the 
differences between the 
male and female lions 
seen in the photo.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
12. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION • DRAW IT Some scientists 
think that life elsewhere in the universe might be based on the 
element silicon, rather than on carbon, as on Earth. Look at the 
electron distribution diagram for silicon in Figure 2.7 and draw 
the Lewis dot structure for silicon. What properties does silicon 
share with carbon that would make silicon-based life more 
likely than, say, neon-based life or aluminum-based life?
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Fifty years ago, pregnant women 
who were prescribed thalidomide for morning sickness gave 
birth to children with birth defects. Thalidomide is a mixture 
of two enantiomers; one reduces morning sickness, but the 
other causes severe birth defects. Today, the FDA has approved 
this drug for non-pregnant individuals with Hansen’s disease 
(leprosy) or newly diagnosed multiple myeloma, a blood 
and bone marrow cancer. The beneficial enantiomer can be 
synthesized and given to patients, but over time, both the 
beneficial and the harmful enantiomer can be detected in 
the!body. Propose a possible explanation for the presence of 
the!harmful enantiomer.
C
OH
O
C
C
H
H
H
H OH C
C
H
H OH
CH OH
OH
URRY1637_12_GE_C04_PRF.indd   113 3/13/20   11:56 PM

=== SIDE 115 ===

Figure 5.1 Alcohol dehydrogenase, a protein that breaks down alcohol in the body, 
is shown here as a molecular model. The form of this protein that an individual 
possesses affects how well that person tolerates drinking alcohol. Proteins are one 
class of large molecules, or macromolecules.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Animation: Making and Breaking 
Polymers
• Figure 5.11 Walkthrough: The Structure 
of a Phospholipid
• BioFlix® Animation: Gene Expression
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Molecular Model: Lysozyme
• Tutorial: Nucleic Acid Structure
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: For each 
class of biological molecules, draw 
two examples and list their structural 
similarities and their functions.
5.1 Macromolecules are polymers, built 
from monomers p. 115
5.2 Carbohydrates serve as fuel and 
building material p. 116
5.3 Lipids are a diverse group of 
hydrophobic molecules p. 120
5.4 Proteins include a diversity of 
structures, resulting in a wide range 
of functions p. 123
5.5 Nucleic acids store, transmit, and help 
express hereditary information p. 132
5.6 Genomics and proteomics have 
transformed biological inquiry and 
applications p. 134
KEY CONCEPTS
Biological Macromolecules  
and Lipids5
Important Biological Molecules
Carbohydrates Proteins
Nucleic acids Lipids
Polymer
Nucleic acid (DNA)
Nucleotide
Lipid
(phospholipid)
Amino acid
Protein (alcohol dehydrogenase)
Carbohydrate (starch)
Glucose
Monomer
Carbohydrates are a source of 
energy and provide structural 
support.
Nucleic acids 
store genetic 
information and 
function in gene 
expression.
Proteins have a wide 
range of functions, such 
as catalyzing reactions 
and transporting 
substances 
into and 
out of 
cells.
Three classes are macromolecules that are 
polymers (long chains of monomer subunits).
The fourth class, lipids, 
are not polymers or 
macromolecules.
Lipids are a group of 
diverse molecules that do 
not mix well with water. Key 
functions include providing 
energy, making up cell 
membranes, and acting as 
hormones.
What are the structures and functions of the
four important classes of biological molecules?
114
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   114 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 116 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  115
Macromolecules are polymers, 
built from monomers
Large carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids, also known as 
macromolecules for their huge size, are chain-like molecules 
called polymers (from the Greek polys, many, and meros, part). A 
polymer is a long molecule consisting of many similar or iden-
tical building blocks linked by covalent bonds, much as a train 
consists of a chain of boxcars. The repeating units that serve as 
the building blocks of a polymer are smaller molecules called 
monomers (from the Greek monos, single). In addition to form-
ing polymers, some monomers have functions of their own.
The Synthesis and Breakdown of Polymers
Although each class of polymer is made up of a different type 
of monomer, the chemical mechanisms by which cells make 
polymers (polymerization) and break them down are similar for 
all classes of large biological molecules. In cells, these processes 
are facilitated by enzymes, specialized macromolecules (usually 
proteins) that speed up chemical reactions. The reaction that 
connects a monomer to another monomer or a polymer is a 
condensation reaction, a reaction in which two molecules are cova-
lently bonded to each other with the loss of a small molecule. If a 
water molecule is lost, it is known as a dehydration reaction. 
For example, carbohydrate and protein polymers are synthesized 
by dehydration reactions. Each reactant contributes part of the 
water molecule that is released during the reaction: One provides 
a hydroxyl group (—OH), while the other provides a hydrogen 
(—H) (Figure 5.2a). This reaction is repeated as monomers are 
added to the chain one by one, lengthening the polymer.
Polymers are disassembled to monomers by hydrolysis, a 
process that is essentially the reverse of the dehydration reaction 
(Figure 5.2b). Hydrolysis means water breakage (from the Greek 
hydro, water, and lysis, break). The bond between monomers is 
broken by the addition of a water molecule, with a hydrogen 
from water attaching to one monomer and the hydroxyl group 
attaching to the other. An example of hydrolysis within our bod-
ies is the process of digestion. The bulk of the organic material 
in our food is in the form of polymers that are much too large to 
enter our cells. Within the digestive tract, various enzymes attack 
the polymers, speeding up hydrolysis. Released monomers are 
then absorbed into the bloodstream for distribution to all body 
cells. Those cells can then use dehydration reactions to assemble 
the monomers into new, different polymers that can perform 
specific functions required by the cell. (Dehydration reactions 
and hydrolysis can also be involved in the formation and break-
down of molecules that are not polymers, such as some lipids.)
The Diversity of Polymers
A cell has thousands of different macromolecules; the col-
lection varies from one type of cell to another. The inherited 
CONCEPT 5.1
differences between close relatives, such as human sib-
lings, reflect small variations in polymers, particularly 
DNA and proteins. Molecular differences between unre-
lated individuals are more extensive, and those between 
species greater still. The diversity of macromolecules in  
the living world is vast, and the possible variety is effec -
tively limitless.
What is the basis for such diversity in life’s polymers? 
These molecules are constructed from only 40 to 50 com-
mon monomers and some others that occur rarely. Building 
a huge variety of polymers from such a limited number of 
monomers is analogous to constructing hundreds of thou-
sands of words from only 26 letters of the alphabet. The key 
is arrangement—the particular linear sequence that the units 
follow. However, this analogy falls far short of describing the 
great diversity of macromolecules because most biological 
polymers have many more monomers than the number of 
letters in even the longest word. Proteins, for example, are 
built from 20 kinds of amino acids arranged in chains that are 
typically hundreds of amino acids long. The molecular logic 
of life is simple but elegant: Small molecules common to all 
organisms act as building blocks that are ordered into unique 
macromolecules.
Despite this immense diversity, molecular structure and 
function can still be grouped roughly by class. Let’s examine 
each of the four major classes of large biological molecules. 
For each class, the large molecules have emergent properties 
not found in their individual components.
H
HO H
Short polymer
Dehydration removes a water 
molecule, forming a new bond.
Hydrolysis adds a water 
molecule, breaking a bond.
Longer polymer
Unlinked monomer
HO
H2O
H2O
12 34
HO H12 34
HO HHOH123
HO H123
(a) Dehydration reaction: synthesizing a polymer
(b) Hydrolysis: breaking down a polymer
. Figure 5.2 The synthesis and breakdown of carbohydrate 
and protein polymers.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Making and Breaking Polymers
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   115 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 117 ===

116 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
C H OH
C
OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
H
CO
H
C H OH
C H OH
C
OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
C H OH
C H OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
C H OH
H
CO
C H OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
C H OH
H
COC H OH
C
OH
C HO H C HO H
Glyceraldehyde
An initial breakdown
product of glucose
Dihydroxyacetone
An initial breakdown
product of glucose
Ribulose
An intermediate
in photosynthesis
Ribose
A component of RNA
Glucose Galactose Fructose
An energy source for organismsEnergy sources for organisms
C H OH
C
OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
H
H OH
H OH
HO H
C HO H
C H OH
C
C
C
Trioses: three-carbon sugars (C3H6O3)
Pentoses: five-carbon sugars (C5H10O5)
Hexoses: six-carbon sugars (C6H12O6)
Aldoses (Aldehyde Sugars)
Carbonyl group at end of 
carbon skeleton
Ketoses (Ketone Sugars)
Carbonyl group within
carbon skeleton
. Figure 5.3 The structure and classification of some 
monosaccharides. Sugars vary in the location of their carbonyl 
groups (orange), the length of their carbon skeletons, and the 
way their parts are arranged spatially around asymmetric carbons 
(compare, for example, the purple portions of glucose and galactose).
CONCEPT CHECK 5.1
1. What are the four main classes of large biological mol-
ecules? Which class does not consist of polymers?
2. How many molecules of water will be released if three 
monomers combine to form a polymer?
3. WHAT IF? If you eat a piece of fish, what reactions must 
occur for the amino acid monomers in the protein of the fish 
to be converted to new proteins in your body?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 5.2
Carbohydrates serve as fuel  
and building material
Carbohydrates include sugars and polymers of sugars. The 
simplest carbohydrates are the monosaccharides, or simple 
sugars; these are the monomers from which more complex 
carbohydrates are built. Disaccharides are double sugars, con-
sisting of two monosaccharides joined by a covalent bond. 
Carbohydrate macromolecules are polymers called polysac-
charides, composed of many sugar building blocks.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Carbohydrates
Sugars
Monosaccharides (from the Greek monos, single, and 
sacchar, sugar) generally have molecular formulas that are 
some multiple of the unit CH2O. Glucose (C6H12O6), the most 
common monosaccharide, is of central importance in the chem-
istry of life. In the structure of glucose, we can see the trademarks 
of a monosaccharide: The molecule has a carbonyl group, 
!
lC“O, and multiple hydroxyl groups, —OH (Figure 5.3).  
Depending on the location of the carbonyl group, a monosac-
charide is either an aldose (aldehyde sugar) or a ketose (ketone 
sugar). Glucose, for example, is an aldose; fructose, an isomer 
of glucose, is a ketose. (Most names for sugars end in -ose.) 
Another criterion for classifying monosaccharides is the size of 
the carbon skeleton, which ranges from three to seven carbons 
long. Glucose, fructose, and other sugars that have six carbons 
are called hexoses. Trioses (three-carbon sugars) and pentoses 
(five-carbon sugars) are also common.
Still another source of diversity for simple sugars is in 
the way their parts are arranged spatially around asym-
metric carbons. (Recall that an asymmetric carbon is a car-
bon attached to four different atoms or groups of atoms.) 
Glucose and galactose, for example, differ only in the place-
ment of parts around one asymmetric carbon (see the purple 
boxes in Figure 5.3). What seems like a small difference is 
significant enough to give the two sugars distinctive shapes 
and binding activities, thus different behaviors.
Although it is convenient to draw glucose with a linear car-
bon skeleton, this representation is not completely accurate. 
In aqueous solutions, glucose molecules, as well as most other 
MAKE CONNECTIONS In the 1970s, a process was developed 
that converts the glucose in corn syrup to its sweeter-tasting isomer, 
fructose. High-fructose corn syrup, a common ingredient in soft drinks 
and processed food, is a mixture of glucose and fructose. What type of 
isomers are glucose and fructose? (See Figure 4.7.)
 Mastering Biology Animation: Monosaccharides
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   116 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 118 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  117
H OH
C
OH
H
H OH
H OH
HO H
H OH
H
(a) 
(b)
2C
3C
4C
4C
5C
6C
1
H OH
OH H
3 C
C
OH
H
4 C
H
OH
1H
H
O
OH
OH H
2
C 2
C3 COH
H
1H
5C 5C
6 CH2OH 6 CH2OH
C
H
O
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO OH32
1
5
6
4
O
Linear and ring forms. Chemical equilibrium between the linear and ring structures greatly favors 
the formation of rings. The carbons of the sugar are numbered 1 to 6, as shown. To form the 
glucose ring, carbon 1 (magenta) bonds to the oxygen (blue) attached to carbon 5.
Abbreviated ring structure.  Each 
unlabeled corner represents a 
carbon. The ring’s thicker edge 
indicates that you are looking at the 
ring edge-on; the components 
attached to the ring lie above or 
below the plane of the ring.
. Figure 5.4 Linear and ring forms of glucose.
five- and six-carbon sugars, form rings, because they are the 
most stable form of these sugars under physiological condi-
tions (Figure 5.4).
Monosaccharides, particularly glucose, are major nutrients 
for cells. In the process known as cellular respiration, cells extract 
energy from glucose molecules by breaking them down in a 
series of reactions. Not only are monosaccharides a major fuel for 
cellular work, but their carbon skeletons also serve as raw mate-
rial for the synthesis of other types of small organic molecules, 
such as amino acids and fatty acids. Monosaccharides that are 
not immediately used in these ways are generally incorporated as 
monomers into disaccharides or polysaccharides, discussed next.
DRAW IT Start with the linear form of fructose (see Figure 5.3) and draw the formation of the 
fructose ring in two steps, as shown in (a). First, number the carbons starting at the top of the linear 
structure. Then draw the molecule in a ringlike orientation, attaching carbon 5 via its oxygen to 
carbon 2. Compare the number of carbons in the ring portions of fructose and glucose.
A disaccharide consists of two monosaccharides joined 
by a glycosidic linkage, a covalent bond formed between 
two monosaccharides by a dehydration reaction (glyco 
refers to carbohydrate). For example, maltose is a disac-
charide formed by the linking of two molecules of glucose 
(Figure 5.5a). Also known as malt sugar, maltose is an ingredi-
ent used in brewing beer. The most prevalent disaccharide is 
sucrose, or table sugar. Its two monomers are glucose and fruc-
tose (Figure 5.5b). Plants generally transport carbohydrates 
from leaves to roots and other nonphotosynthetic organs 
in the form of sucrose. Lactose, the sugar present in milk, is 
another disaccharide, in this case a glucose molecule joined 
O
Glucose Glucose Maltose
1
HOOH OH
4
OH
1– 4
glycosidic
linkage
(a)
H2O
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
O
Sucrose
1 2
1– 2
glycosidic
linkage
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HOCH2OH
H
Glucose Fructose
HOOH
H2O
H OH
HO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO
OH H
O
CH2OH
H HO
CH2OH
H
OH H
O
CH2OH
H HO
Dehydration reaction in 
the synthesis of maltose. 
The bonding of two glucose 
units forms maltose. The 1–4 
glycosidic linkage joins the 
number 1 carbon of one 
glucose to the number 4 
carbon of the second glucose. 
Joining the glucose monomers 
in a different way would re- 
sult in a different disaccharide. 
(b)Dehydration reaction in 
the synthesis of sucrose. 
Sucrose is a disaccharide 
formed from glucose and 
fructose. Notice that 
fructose forms a five-sided 
ring, though it is a hexose 
like glucose.
. Figure 5.5 Examples of disaccharide synthesis.
DRAW IT Referring to Figures 5.3 and 5.4, number the carbons in each sugar 
in this figure. How does the name of each linkage relate to the numbers?  Mastering Biology Animation: Synthesis of Sucrose
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   117 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 119 ===

118 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Other polysaccharides serve as building material for structures 
that protect the cell or the whole organism. The architecture 
and function of a polysaccharide are determined by its mono-
saccharides and by the positions of its glycosidic linkages.
Storage Polysaccharides
Both plants and animals store sugars for later use in the form of 
storage polysaccharides (Figure 5.6). Plants store starch, a poly-
mer of glucose monomers, as granules within cellular structures 
known as plastids. (Plastids include chloroplasts.) Synthesizing 
starch enables the plant to stockpile surplus glucose. Because 
glucose is a major cellular fuel, starch represents stored energy. 
The sugar can later be withdrawn by the plant from this carbo-
hydrate “bank” by hydrolysis, which breaks the bonds between 
the glucose monomers. Most animals, including humans, also 
have enzymes that can hydrolyze plant starch, making glucose 
to a galactose molecule. Disaccharides must be broken down 
into monosaccharides to be used for energy by organisms. 
Lactose intolerance is a common condition in humans who 
lack lactase, the enzyme that breaks down lactose. The sugar 
is instead broken down by intestinal bacteria, causing forma-
tion of gas and subsequent cramping. The problem may be 
avoided by taking the enzyme lactase when eating or drinking 
dairy products or consuming dairy products that have already 
been treated with lactase to break down the lactose.
Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides are macromolecules, polymers with a few 
hundred to a few thousand monosaccharides joined by glyco-
sidic linkages. Some polysaccharides serve as storage material, 
hydrolyzed as needed to provide monosaccharides for cells. 
O
O
O
O
O
O
OO
O
O
O O
O
OO
O
O
OO
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OO
O
O
O O
O
OO
O
O
OO
O
O
OO
O
O
OO
O
O
O O
O
Glycogen (extensively branched)
Storage structures (plastids) 
containing starch granules in a 
potato tuber cell
Glucose
monomer
Amylose (unbranched)
Amylopectin
(somewhat branched)
Glycogen granules
stored in muscle
tissue
Muscle 
tissue
(a) Starch
(b) Glycogen
(c) Cellulose
O
O
OO
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
 O
OO
 O
O
O
O
O
OO
O
O
O
OO
Cellulose molecule (unbranched)
Cellulose microfibrils 
in a plant cell wall
Plant cell,
surrounded
by cell wall
Microfibril (bundle of
about 80 cellulose 
molecules) Hydrogen bonds between
parallel cellulose molecules
hold them together.
Cell wall
10 om
0.5 om
1 om
50 om
O
O O
. Figure 5.6 Polysaccharides of plants and animals. (a) Starch stored in plant cells, (b) glycogen 
stored in muscle cells, and (c) structural cellulose fibers in plant cell walls are all polysaccharides 
composed entirely of glucose monomers (green hexagons). In starch and glycogen, the polymer 
chains tend to form helices in unbranched regions because of the angle of the 1–4 linkages between 
glucose molecules. There are two kinds of starch: amylose and amylopectin. Cellulose, with a 
different kind of glucose linkage, is always unbranched.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   118 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 120 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  119
difference is based on the fact that there are actually two slightly 
different ring structures for glucose (Figure 5.7a). When glucose 
forms a ring, the hydroxyl group attached to the number 1 car-
bon is positioned either below or above the plane of the ring. 
These two ring forms for glucose are called alpha (a) and beta 
(b), respectively. (Greek letters are often used as a “numbering” 
system for different versions of biological structures, much as 
we use the letters a, b, c, and so on for the parts of a question or a 
figure.) In starch, all the glucose monomers are in the a configu-
ration (Figure 5.7b), the arrangement we saw in Figures 5.4 and 
5.5. In contrast, the glucose monomers of cellulose are all in the 
b configuration, making every glucose monomer “upside down” 
with respect to its neighbors (Figure 5.7c; see also Figure 5.6c).
The differing glycosidic linkages in starch and cellulose give 
the two molecules distinct three-dimensional shapes. Certain 
starch molecules are largely helical, fitting their function of effi-
ciently storing glucose units. Conversely, a cellulose molecule is 
straight. Cellulose is never branched, and some hydroxyl groups 
on its glucose monomers are free to hydrogen-bond with the 
hydroxyls of other cellulose molecules lying parallel to it. In 
plant cell walls, parallel cellulose molecules held together in this 
way are grouped into units called microfibrils (see Figure 5.6c).  
These cable-like microfibrils are a strong building material for 
plants and an important substance for humans because cellu-
lose is the major constituent of paper and the only component 
of cotton. The unbranched structure of cellulose thus fits its 
function: imparting strength to parts of the plant.
Enzymes that digest starch by hydrolyzing its a link-
ages are unable to hydrolyze the b linkages of cellulose 
due to the different shapes of these two molecules. In fact, 
available as a nutrient for cells. Potato tubers and grains—the 
fruits of wheat, maize (corn), rice, and other grasses—are the 
major sources of starch in the human diet.
Most of the glucose monomers in starch are joined by 1–4 
linkages (number 1 carbon to number 4 carbon), like the glu-
cose units in maltose (see Figure 5.5a). The simplest form of 
starch, amylose, is unbranched. Amylopectin, a more complex 
starch, is a branched polymer with 1–6 linkages at the branch 
points. Both of these starches are shown in Figure 5.6a.
Animals store a polysaccharide called glycogen, a poly-
mer of glucose that is like amylopectin but more extensively 
branched (Figure 5.6b). Vertebrates store glycogen mainly in 
liver and muscle cells. Breakdown of glycogen in these cells 
releases glucose when the demand for energy increases. (The 
extensively branched structure of glycogen fits its function: 
More free ends are available for breakdown.) This stored fuel 
cannot sustain an animal for long, however. In humans, for 
example, glycogen stores are depleted in about a day unless they 
are replenished by eating. This is an issue of concern in low-
carbohydrate diets, which can result in weakness and fatigue.
Structural Polysaccharides
Organisms build strong materials from structural polysac-
charides. For example, the polysaccharide called cellulose is 
a major component of the tough walls that enclose plant cells 
(Figure 5.6c). Globally, plants produce almost 1014 kg (100 
billion tons) of cellulose per year; it is the most abundant 
organic compound on Earth.
Like starch, cellulose is a polymer of glucose with 1–4 glyco-
sidic linkages, but the linkages in these two polymers differ. The 
C H OH
C
OH
H
C H OH
C H OH
CHO H
C H OH
d Glucosec Glucose
(a)
OH
1
H
4
H
O
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HOOH
1
H
4
H
O
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO
O
(b)
1
O
CH2OH CH 2OH CH 2OH CH 2OH
HO OH
4
O
O
O
O
O
OH OH OH OH
OH OH
OH
CH2OH
O1
O
HO 4 O
O
CH2OH
CH2OHCH2OH
OH OH
OHOH
OH
O
O O
OH OH OH OHOH OH OH
c and d glucose ring 
structures. These two 
interconvertible forms of 
glucose differ in the 
placement of the hydroxyl
group (highlighted in blue) 
attached to the number 1 
carbon.  
Starch: 1–4 linkage of c glucose monomers. All monomers 
are in the same orientation. Compare the positions of the 
    OH groups highlighted in yellow with those in cellulose (c).
(c)Cellulose: 1–4 linkage of d glucose monomers. In cellulose, 
every d glucose monomer is upside down with respect to its 
neighbors. (See the highlighted     OH groups.)
Nutrition Facts
16%Dietary Fiber 4g
Soluble Fiber 2g
Insoluble Fiber 2g
“Insoluble Fiber” 
listed on food labels 
is mainly cellulose, 
shown below.
. Figure 5.7 Starch and cellulose structures.
  Mastering Biology Animation: Starch, Cellulose,  
and Glycogen Structures
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   119 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 121 ===

120 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
1. Write the formula for a monosaccharide that has five 
carbons.
2. Glucose and fructose are both hexoses and have the same 
formula (C6H12O6). Yet fructose is a ketose, and glucose is an 
aldose. What distinguishes ketoses from aldoses?
3. WHAT IF? After a cow is given antibiotics to treat an infec-
tion, a vet gives the animal a drink of “gut culture” containing 
various prokaryotes. Why is this necessary?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
few organisms possess enzymes that can digest cellulose. 
Almost all animals, including humans, do not; the cellulose 
in our food passes through the digestive tract and is elimi-
nated with the feces. Along the way, the cellulose abrades 
the wall of the digestive tract and stimulates the lining to 
secrete mucus, which aids in the smooth passage of food 
through the tract. Thus, although cellulose is not a nutrient 
for humans, it is an important part of a healthy diet. Most 
fruits, vegetables, and whole grains are rich in cellulose. On 
food packages, “insoluble fiber” refers mainly to cellulose 
(see Figure 5.7).
Some microorganisms can digest cellulose, breaking it 
down into glucose monomers. A cow harbors cellulose-
digesting prokaryotes and protists in its gut. These microbes 
hydrolyze the cellulose of hay and grass and convert the 
glucose to other compounds that nourish the cow. Similarly, 
a termite, which is unable to digest cellulose by itself, has 
prokaryotes or protists living in its gut that can make a meal 
of wood. Some fungi can also digest cellulose in soil and 
elsewhere, thereby helping recycle chemical elements within 
Earth’s ecosystems.
Another important structural polysaccharide is chitin, 
the carbohydrate used by arthropods (insects, spiders, crusta-
ceans, and related animals) to build their exoskeletons—hard 
cases that surround the soft parts of an animal (Figure 5.8). 
Made up of chitin embedded in a layer of proteins, the case is 
leathery and flexible at first, but becomes hardened when the 
proteins are chemically linked to each other (as in insects) or 
encrusted with calcium carbonate (as in crabs). Chitin is also 
found in fungi, which use this polysaccharide rather than 
cellulose as the building material for their cell walls. Chitin is 
similar to cellulose, with b linkages, except that the glucose 
monomer of chitin has a nitrogen-containing attachment 
(see Figure 5.8).
CO
CH3
H NH
OHO
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO H
b  Chitin, embedded in proteins, forms 
the exoskeleton of arthropods. This  
emperor dragonfly (Anax imperator) is 
molting—shedding its old exoskeleton 
(brown) and emerging upside down in 
adult form.
b  The structure 
of the chitin 
monomer
. Figure 5.8 Chitin, a structural polysaccharide.
CONCEPT CHECK 5.2
CONCEPT 5.3
Lipids are a diverse group 
of hydrophobic molecules
Lipids are the one class of large biological molecules that does 
not include true polymers, and they are generally not big 
enough to be considered macromolecules. The compounds 
called lipids are grouped with each other because they share 
one important trait: They are hydrophobic: They mix poorly, 
if at all, with water. This behavior of lipids is based on their 
molecular structure. Although they may have some polar 
bonds associated with oxygen, lipids consist mostly of hydro-
carbon regions with relatively non-polar C—H bonds. Lipids 
are varied in form and function. They include waxes and cer-
tain pigments, but we will focus on the types of lipids that are 
most important biologically: fats, phospholipids, and steroids.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Lipids
Fats
Although fats are not polymers, they are large molecules 
assembled from smaller molecules by dehydration reactions, 
like the dehydration reaction described in Figure 5.2a. A fat 
consists of a glycerol molecule joined to three fatty acids 
(Figure 5.9). Glycerol is an alcohol; each of its three carbons 
bears a hydroxyl group. A fatty acid has a long carbon skel-
eton, usually 16 or 18 carbon atoms in length. The carbon at 
one end of the skeleton is part of a carboxyl group, the func-
tional group that gives these molecules the name fatty acid. 
The rest of the skeleton consists of a hydrocarbon chain. The 
relatively nonpolar C—H bonds in the hydrocarbon chains of 
fatty acids are the reason fats are hydrophobic. Fats separate 
from water because the water molecules hydrogen-bond to 
one another and exclude the fats. This is why vegetable oil  
(a liquid fat) separates from the aqueous vinegar solution in a 
bottle of salad dressing.
In making a fat, each fatty acid molecule is joined to glyc-
erol by a dehydration reaction (Figure 5.9a). This results 
in an ester linkage, a bond between a hydroxyl group and 
a carboxyl group. The completed fat consists of three fatty 
acids linked to one glycerol molecule. (Other names for a fat 
are triacylglycerol and triglyceride; levels of triglycerides are 
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   120 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 122 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  121
reported when blood is tested for lipids.) The fatty acids in a 
fat can all be the same, or they can be of two or three different 
kinds, as in Figure 5.9b.
The terms saturated fats and unsaturated fats are commonly 
used in the context of nutrition (Figure 5.10). These terms 
refer to the structure of the hydrocarbon chains of the fatty 
acids. If there are no double bonds between carbon atoms 
composing a chain, then as many hydrogen atoms as possible 
are bonded to the carbon skeleton. Such a structure is said 
to be saturated with hydrogen, and the resulting fatty acid is 
therefore called a saturated fatty acid (Figure 5.10a). An 
unsaturated fatty acid has one or more double bonds, with 
one fewer hydrogen atom on each double-bonded carbon. 
Nearly every double bond in naturally occurring fatty acids 
is a cis double bond, which creates a kink in the hydrocarbon 
chain wherever it occurs (Figure 5.10b). (See Figure 4.7b to 
remind yourself about cis and trans double bonds.)
A fat made from saturated fatty acids is called a saturated 
fat. Most animal fats are saturated: The hydrocarbon chains 
of their fatty acids—the “tails” of the fat molecules—lack 
double bonds (see Figure 5.10a), and their flexibility allows 
the fat molecules to pack together tightly. Saturated animal 
(a)
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
HC
O
HO
C
H
H
C OHH
C
H
OHH
C
H
OH
CH
C
H
H
H2O Fatty acid
(in this case, palmitic acid)
Glycerol
C
O
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
OC
O
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
OC
O
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
(b)
Ester linkage
OH
One of three dehydration reactions in the synthesis of a fat.
One water molecule is removed for each fatty acid joined to 
the glycerol. 
A fat molecule (triacylglycerol) with three fatty acid units. 
In this example, two of the fatty acid units are identical.
. Figure 5.9 The synthesis and structure of a fat, or 
triacylglycerol. The molecular building blocks of a fat are one 
molecule of glycerol and three molecules of fatty acids. The 
carbons of the fatty acids are arranged zigzag to suggest the actual 
orientations of the four single bonds extending from each carbon 
(see Figures 4.3a and 4.6b).
Cis double bond
causes bending.
C
H
H
CO H
C
H
OH
O
C
C
C
O
O
O
Structural formula of an 
unsaturated fat molecule
C
H
H
CO H
C
H
OH
O
C
C
C
O
O
O
Space-filling model of oleic 
acid, an unsaturated fatty 
acid
(a) Saturated fat
At room temperature, the molecules of 
a saturated fat, such as the fat in 
butter, are packed closely together, 
forming a solid. 
(b) Unsaturated fat
Structural formula of a 
saturated fat molecule 
(Each hydrocarbon chain 
is represented as a zigzag 
line, where each bend 
represents a carbon atom; 
hydrogens are not 
shown.)
Space-filling model of 
stearic acid, a saturated 
fatty acid (red = oxygen, 
black = carbon, gray = 
hydrogen)
At room temperature, the molecules of 
an unsaturated fat such as olive oil 
cannot pack together closely enough to 
solidify because of the kinks in some of 
their fatty acid hydrocarbon chains.
. Figure 5.10 Saturated and unsaturated fats and fatty acids.
fats, such as lard and butter, are solid at room temperature. 
In contrast, the fats of plants and fishes are generally unsatu-
rated, meaning that they are composed of one or more types 
of unsaturated fatty acids. Usually liquid at room temperature, 
plant and fish fats are referred to as oils—olive oil and cod liver 
oil are examples. The kinks where the cis double bonds are 
located (see Figure 5.10b) prevent the molecules from packing 
together closely enough to solidify at room temperature. The 
phrase hydrogenated vegetable oils on food labels means that 
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   121 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 123 ===

122 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
and withdrawn from storage. In addition to storing energy, 
adipose tissue also cushions such vital organs as the kidneys, 
and a layer of fat beneath the skin insulates the body. This 
subcutaneous layer is especially thick in whales, seals, and 
most other marine mammals, insulating their bodies in cold 
ocean water.
Phospholipids
Cells as we know them could not exist without another type 
of lipid, called phospholipids. Phospholipids are essential 
for cells because they are major constituents of cell mem-
branes. Their structure provides a classic example of how 
form fits function at the molecular level. As shown in  
Figure 5.11, a phospholipid is similar to a fat molecule 
but has only two fatty acids attached to glycerol rather than 
three. The third hydroxyl group of glycerol is joined to a 
phosphate group, which has a negative electrical charge in 
the cell. Typically, an additional small charged or polar mol-
ecule is also linked to the phosphate group. Choline is one 
such molecule (see Figure 5.11), but there are many others as 
well, allowing formation of a variety of phospholipids that 
differ from each other.
The two ends of phospholipids show different behaviors 
with respect to water. The hydrocarbon tails are hydropho-
bic and are excluded from water. However, the phosphate 
group and its attachments form a hydrophilic head that 
has an affinity for water. When phospholipids are added to 
water, they self-assemble into a double-layered sheet called a 
“bilayer” that shields their hydrophobic fatty acid tails from 
water (Figure 5.11d).
unsaturated fats have been synthetically converted to saturated 
fats by adding hydrogen, allowing them to solidify. Peanut 
butter, margarine, and many other products are hydrogenated 
to prevent lipids from separating out in liquid (oil) form.
A diet rich in saturated fats is one of several factors that may 
contribute to the cardiovascular disease known as atheroscle-
rosis. In this condition, deposits called plaques develop within 
the walls of blood vessels, causing inward bulges that impede 
blood flow and reduce the resilience of the vessels. The process 
of hydrogenating vegetable oils produces not only saturated 
fats but also unsaturated fats with trans double bonds. It appears 
that trans fats can contribute to coronary heart disease (see 
Concept 43.4). Because trans fats are especially common in 
baked goods and processed foods, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) requires nutritional labels to include infor-
mation on trans fat content. In addition, the FDA has ordered 
U.S. food manufacturers to stop producing trans fats in foods by 
2021. Some countries, such as Denmark and Switzerland, have 
already banned artificially produced trans fats in foods.
The major function of fats is energy storage. The hydro-
carbon chains of fats are similar to gasoline molecules and 
just as rich in energy. A gram of fat stores more than twice as 
much energy as a gram of a polysaccharide, such as starch. 
Because plants are relatively immobile, they can function 
with bulky energy storage in the form of starch. (Vegetable 
oils are generally obtained from seeds, where more compact 
storage is an asset to the plant.) Animals, however, must carry 
their energy stores with them, so there is an advantage to hav-
ing a more compact reservoir of fuel—fat. Humans and other 
mammals stock their long-term food reserves in adipose cells 
(see Figure 4.6a), which swell and shrink as fat is deposited 
CH2 N(CH3)3
CH2
O
P
O
CH2
O
CH
O
CH2
O O–
COCO
+
Choline
Phosphate
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Hydrophilic
head
Kink due to cis
double bond
Hydrophobic
tails
(a) Structural formula (b) Space-filling model (c) Phospholipid symbol
Hydrophilic headHydrophobic tails
(d) Phospholipid bilayer
. Figure 5.11 The structure of a phospholipid. A phospholipid 
has a hydrophilic (polar) head and two hydrophobic (nonpolar) 
tails. This particular phospholipid, called a phosphatidylcholine, has 
a choline attached to a phosphate group. Shown here are (a) the 
structural formula, (b) the space-filling model (yellow = phosphorus, 
blue = nitrogen), (c) the symbol for a phospholipid that will appear 
throughout this book, and (d) the bilayer structure formed by self-
assembly of phospholipids in an aqueous environment.
DRAW IT Draw an oval around the hydrophilic head of the space-filling model.
  Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough 
Animation: Space-Filling Model of a Phospholipid
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   122 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 124 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  123
Proteins include a diversity of  
structures, resulting in a wide 
range of functions
Nearly every dynamic function of a living being depends on 
proteins. In fact, the importance of proteins is underscored 
by their name, which comes from the Greek word proteios, 
meaning “first,” or “primary.” Proteins account for more 
than 50% of the dry mass of most cells, and they are instru-
mental in almost everything organisms do. Some proteins 
speed up chemical reactions, while others play a role in 
defense, storage, transport, cellular communication, move-
ment, or structural support. Figure 5.13 shows examples of 
proteins with these functions, which you’ll learn more about 
in later chapters.
Life would not be possible without enzymes, most of 
which are proteins. Enzymatic proteins regulate metabolism 
by acting as catalysts, chemical agents that selectively speed 
up chemical reactions without being consumed in the reac-
tion. Because an enzyme can perform its function over and 
over again, these molecules can be thought of as workhorses 
that keep cells running by carrying out the processes of life.
A human has tens of thousands of different proteins, 
each with a specific structure and function; proteins, in fact, 
are the most structurally sophisticated molecules known. 
Consistent with their diverse functions, they vary extensively 
in structure, each type of protein having a unique three-
dimensional shape.
Proteins are all constructed from the same set of 20 
amino acids, linked in unbranched polymers. The bond 
between amino acids is called a peptide bond, so a polymer 
of amino acids is called a polypeptide. A protein is a 
biologically functional molecule made up of one or more 
polypeptides, each folded and coiled into a specific three-
dimensional structure.
Amino Acids (Monomers)
All amino acids share a common 
structure. An amino acid is an 
organic molecule with both an amino 
group and a carboxyl group (see 
Figure 4.9); the small figure shows 
the general formula for an amino 
acid. At the center of the amino acid 
is an asymmetric carbon atom called 
the alpha (a) carbon. Its four different 
partners are an amino group, a car-
boxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and a variable group sym-
bolized by R. The R group, also called the side chain, differs 
with each amino acid. The R group may be as simple as a 
At the surface of a cell, phospholipids are arranged in a 
similar bilayer. The hydrophilic heads of the molecules are 
on the outside of the bilayer, in contact with the aqueous 
solutions inside and outside of the cell. The hydrophobic tails 
point toward the interior of the bilayer, away from the water. 
The phospholipid bilayer forms a boundary between the cell 
and its external environment and establishes separate com-
partments within eukaryotic cells; in fact, the existence of 
cells depends on the properties of phospholipids.
Steroids
Steroids are lipids characterized by a carbon skeleton con-
sisting of four fused rings. Different steroids are distinguished 
by the particular chemical groups attached to this ensemble 
of rings. Cholesterol, a type of steroid, is a crucial molecule 
in animals (Figure 5.12). It is a common component of ani-
mal cell membranes and is also the precursor from which 
other steroids, such as the vertebrate sex hormones, are syn-
thesized. In vertebrates, cholesterol is synthesized in the liver 
and is also obtained from the diet. A high level of cholesterol 
in the blood may contribute to atherosclerosis, although 
some researchers are questioning the roles of cholesterol and 
saturated fats in the development of this condition.
CH3
HO
CH3
H3C CH3
CH3
. Figure 5.12 Cholesterol, a steroid. Cholesterol is the molecule 
from which other steroids, including the sex hormones, are 
synthesized. Steroids vary in the chemical groups attached to their 
four interconnected rings (shown in gold).
MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare cholesterol with the sex hormones 
shown in the figure at the beginning of Concept 4.3. Circle the chemical 
groups that cholesterol has in common with estradiol; put a square around 
the chemical groups that cholesterol has in common with testosterone.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Lovell Jones: Investigating  
the effects of sex hormones on cancer
1. Compare the structure of a fat (triglyceride) with that of a 
phospholipid.
2. Why are human sex hormones considered lipids?
3. WHAT IF? Suppose a marine mammal is exposed to very low 
temperatures. Explain how it would maintain the fluidity of 
cell membranes.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 5.3
CONCEPT 5.4
OH
O
CCC
R
H
Side chain (R group)
N
c carbon
H
H
Amino
group
Carboxyl 
group
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   123 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 125 ===

124 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Enzymatic proteins
Storage proteins
Contractile and motor proteins
Hormonal proteins
Defensive proteins
Transport proteins
Structural proteins
Receptor proteins
30 om 60 om
Function: Selective acceleration of chemical reactions
Example: Digestive enzymes catalyze the hydrolysis of bonds in food 
molecules.
Function: Storage of amino acids
Examples: Casein, the protein of milk, is the major source of amino 
acids for baby mammals. Plants have storage proteins in their seeds. 
Ovalbumin is the protein of egg white, used as an amino acid source 
for the developing embryo.
Function: Movement
Examples: Motor proteins are responsible for the undulations of cilia 
and flagella. Actin and myosin proteins are responsible for the contrac-
tion of muscles.
Function: Coordination of an organism‘s activities
Example: Insulin, a hormone secreted by the pancreas, causes other 
tissues to take up glucose, thus regulating blood sugar concentration.
Function: Protection against disease
Example: Antibodies inactivate and help destroy viruses and bacteria.
Function: Transport of substances
Examples: Hemoglobin, the iron-containing protein of vertebrate 
blood, transports oxygen from the lungs to other parts of the body. 
Other proteins transport molecules across membranes, as shown here.
Function: Support 
Examples: Keratin is the protein of hair, horns, feathers, and other skin 
appendages. Insects and spiders use silk fibers to make their cocoons 
and webs, respectively. Collagen and elastin proteins provide a fibrous 
framework in animal connective tissues.
Function: Response of cell to chemical stimuli
Example: Receptors built into the membrane of a nerve cell detect 
signaling molecules released by other nerve cells.
Enzyme
Ovalbumin Amino acids
for embryo
Transport 
protein
Signaling molecules
Collagen
Receptor protein
Virus Bacterium
Antibodies
Cell membrane
High
blood sugar
Normal
blood sugar
Actin
Muscle tissue Connective tissue
Myosin
Insulin
secreted
. Figure 5.13 An overview of protein functions.  Mastering Biology Animation: Protein Functions
hydrogen atom, or it may be a carbon skeleton with vari-
ous functional groups attached. The physical and chemical 
properties of the side chain determine the unique charac-
teristics of a particular amino acid, thus affecting its func-
tional role in a polypeptide.
Figure 5.14 shows the 20 amino acids that cells use to 
build their thousands of proteins. Here the amino groups 
and carboxyl groups are all depicted in ionized form, the way 
they usually exist at the pH found in a cell. The amino acids 
are grouped according to the properties of their side chains. 
One group consists of amino acids with nonpolar side chains, 
which are hydrophobic. Another group consists of amino 
acids with polar side chains, which are hydrophilic. Acidic 
amino acids have side chains that are generally negative in 
charge due to the presence of a carboxyl group, which is usu-
ally dissociated (ionized) at cellular pH. Basic amino acids 
have amino groups in their side chains that are generally 
positive in charge. (The terms acidic and basic in this context 
refer only to groups in the side chains because all amino 
acids—as monomers—have carboxyl groups and amino 
groups.) Because they are charged, acidic and basic side 
chains are also hydrophilic.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   124 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 126 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  125
CH2
CH2
S
CH3
Proline 
(Pro or P)
Side chain
(R group)
CC O–
HO
H
H3N+ CC O–
HO
H3N+
CH2
CH2 CH2
NH
CH2
CH2 H2C
Leucine 
(Leu or L)
Valine 
(Val or V)
Alanine 
(Ala or A)
Glycine 
(Gly or G)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Methionine 
(Met or M)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Serine 
(Ser or S)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Threonine 
(Thr or T)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Cysteine 
(Cys or C)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Phenylalanine 
(Phe or F)
CC O–
HO
H3N+ CC O–
HO
H2N+
Tryptophan 
(Trp or W)
Isoleucine 
(Ile or I)
CH3
CC O–
HO
H3N+
CH3CH3
CH
CC O–
HO
H3N+ CC O–
HO
H3N+
CH3CH3
CH
H3CCH
CH3
CH2
OH
CH2
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Aspartic acid 
(Asp or D)
OH CH3
CH
SH
CH2
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Tyrosine 
(Tyr or Y)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Asparagine
(Asn or N)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Glutamine 
(Gln or Q)
CH2
NH2O
C
CH2 CH2
OH
O– O
C
CH2
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Glutamic acid 
(Glu or E)
CH2
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Lysine 
(Lys or K)
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Arginine 
(Arg or R)
Acidic (negatively charged)
O–
CH2
O
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3
+
CH2
CH2
CC O–
HO
H3N+
Histidine 
(His or H)
CH2
NH
CH2
NH2
+C
NH2
NH+
NH
O
CH2
C
NH2
Basic (positively charged)
Nonpolar side chains; hydrophobic
Polar side chains; hydrophilic
Electrically charged side chains; hydrophilic  
Since cysteine is only weakly 
polar, it is sometimes classified 
as a nonpolar amino acid.
OH
O
CCC
R
H
N
c carbon
H
H
Amino
group
Non-ionized
generic
amino acid
Ionized
generic
amino acid
Side chain (R group)
Carboxyl 
group
OH–
O
CCC
R
H
N+H
c carbon
H
H
Amino
group
Side chain (R group)
Carboxyl 
group
. Figure 5.14 The 20 amino acids of proteins. At the top right 
are the non-ionized and ionized forms of a generic amino acid. 
The specific amino acids are shown below in their ionized form, 
prevalent at the pH within a cell (pH 7.2). The amino acids are 
grouped by properties of their side chains. The three-letter and  
one-letter abbreviations for the amino acids are in parentheses.  
All of the amino acids used in proteins are L enantiomers  
(see Figure 4.7c).
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   125 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 127 ===

126 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
group (the C-terminus). The chemical nature of the molecule 
as a whole is determined by the kind and sequence of the side 
chains, which determine how a polypeptide folds and thus its 
final shape and chemical characteristics. The immense variety 
of polypeptides in nature illustrates an important concept intro-
duced earlier—that cells can make many different polymers by 
linking a limited set of monomers into diverse sequences.
Protein Structure and Function
The specific activities of proteins result from their intricate 
three-dimensional architecture, the simplest level of which is 
the sequence of their amino acids. What can the amino acid 
sequence of a polypeptide tell us about the three-dimensional 
structure (commonly referred to simply as the “structure”) of 
the protein and its function? The term polypeptide is not synon-
ymous with the term protein. Even for a protein consisting of a 
single polypeptide, the relationship is somewhat analogous to 
that between a long strand of yarn and a sweater of particular 
size and shape that can be knitted from the yarn. A functional 
protein is not just a polypeptide chain, but one or more poly-
peptides precisely twisted, folded, and coiled into a molecule of 
unique shape, which can be shown in several different types of 
models (Figure 5.16). And it is the amino acid sequence of each 
polypeptide that determines what three-dimensional structure 
the protein will have under normal cellular conditions.
When a cell synthesizes a polypeptide, the chain may fold 
spontaneously, assuming the functional structure for that 
protein. This folding is driven and reinforced by the forma-
tion of various bonds between parts of the chain, which in 
turn depends on the sequence of amino acids. Many proteins 
are roughly spherical (globular proteins), while others are 
shaped like long fibers (fibrous proteins). Even within these 
broad categories, countless variations exist.
A protein’s specific structure determines how it works. In 
almost every case, the function of a protein depends on its 
ability to recognize and bind to some other molecule. In an 
especially striking example of the marriage of form and func-
tion, Figure 5.17 shows the exact match of shape between an 
antibody (a protein in the body) and the particular foreign 
substance on a flu virus that the antibody binds to and marks 
for destruction. Also, you may recall another example of mol-
ecules with matching shapes from Concept 2.3: endorphin 
molecules (produced by the body) and morphine molecules  
(a manufactured drug), both of which fit into receptor proteins 
on the surface of brain cells in humans, producing euphoria 
and relieving pain. Morphine, heroin, and other opiate drugs 
are able to mimic endorphins because they all have a shape 
similar to that of endorphins and can thus fit into and bind to 
endorphin receptors in the brain. This fit is very specific, some-
thing like a handshake (see Figure 2.16). The endorphin recep-
tor, like other receptor molecules, is a protein. The function of 
a protein—for instance, the ability of a receptor protein to bind 
to a particular pain-relieving signaling molecule—is an emer-
gent property resulting from exquisite molecular order.
Polypeptides (Amino Acid Polymers)
Now that we have examined amino acids, let’s see how they are 
linked to form polymers (Figure 5.15). When two amino acids 
are positioned so that the carboxyl group of one is adjacent 
to the amino group of the other, they can become joined by a 
dehydration reaction, with the removal of a water molecule. 
The resulting covalent bond is called a peptide bond. Repeated 
over and over, this process yields a polypeptide, a polymer of 
many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. You’ll learn more 
about how cells synthesize polypeptides in Concept 17.4.
The repeating sequence of atoms highlighted in purple in 
Figure 5.15 is called the polypeptide backbone. Extending from 
this backbone are the different side chains (R groups) of the 
amino acids. Polypeptides range in length from a few amino 
acids to 1,000 or more. Each specific polypeptide has a unique 
linear sequence of amino acids. Note that one end of the 
polypeptide chain has a free amino group (the N-terminus of 
the polypeptide), while the opposite end has a free carboxyl 
HN
H
C
H
C
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
S
NC
H
C
O
CH2 
OH
N
HH
C
H
C
O
OH
SH
Peptide bond
CH2
HOH
HN
H
C
H
C
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
Amino end
(N-terminus)
Carboxyl end
(C-terminus)
New peptide
bond forming
S
NC
H
C
O
CH2 
OH
N
HH
C
H
C
O
OH
SH
Peptide 
bond
CH2
Side 
chains
(R 
groups)
Back-
bone
H2O
. Figure 5.15 Making a polypeptide chain. Peptide bonds are 
formed by dehydration reactions, which link the carboxyl group of 
one amino acid to the amino group of the next. The peptide bonds 
are formed one at a time, starting with the amino acid at the amino 
end (N-terminus). The polypeptide has a repetitive backbone (purple) 
to which the amino acid side chains (yellow and green) are attached.
DRAW IT Label the three amino acids in the upper part of the figure 
using three-letter and one-letter codes. Circle and label the carboxyl and 
amino groups that will form the new peptide bond.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   126 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 128 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  127
Structural Models
Proteins can be represented in different ways, depending on the goal of the illustration.
Using data from structural studies
of proteins, computers can
generate various types of models.
Each model emphasizes a different
aspect of the protein’s structure,
but no model can show what a
protein actually looks like. These
three models depict lysozyme, a
protein in tears and saliva that
helps prevent infection by binding
to target molecules on bacteria.
5iORNiƂGd&iCgTCOU
It isn‘t always necessary to
use a detailed computer
model; simplified
diagrams are useful when
the focus of the figure is
on the function of the
protein, not the structure.
Space-filling model: Emphasizes 
the overall globular shape. Shows 
all the atoms of the protein 
(except hydrogen), which are 
color-coded: gray = carbon, 
red = oxygen, blue = nitrogen, 
and yellow = sulfur.
A transparent shape
is drawn around the
contours of a ribbon
model of the protein
rhodopsin, showing
the shape of the
molecule as well as
some internal details.
When structural
details are not
needed, a solid
shape can be used.
A simple shape is used here to
represent a generic enzyme
because the diagram focuses on
enzyme action in general.
Sometimes a protein
is represented simply
as a dot, as shown
here for insulin.
Ribbon model: Shows only 
the polypeptide backbone, 
emphasizing how it folds 
and coils to form a 3-D 
shape, in this case stabilized 
by disulfide bridges (yellow lines).
Wireframe model (blue): 
Shows the polypeptide backbone 
with side chains extending from 
it. A ribbon model (purple) is 
superimposed on the wireframe 
model. The bacterial target 
molecule (yellow) is bound.
Pancreas cell
secreting
insulin
6 CTgGVOoNGEWNG
Enzyme
1.In which model is it easiest to follow 
the polypeptide backbone? 
2.Draw a simple version of lysozyme that shows its 
overall shape, based on the molecular models in 
the top section of the ﬁgure. 
3.Why is it unnecessary 
to show the actual 
shape of insulin here? 
. Figure 5.16 V I S U A L I Z I N G  P R O T E I N S
 Instructors: The tutorial “Molecular 
Model: Lysozyme,” in which students 
rotate 3-D models of lysozyme, can 
be assigned in Mastering Biology.
Antibody protein Protein from flu virus
c Figure 5.17 Complementarity of shape between two 
protein surfaces. A technique called X-ray crystallography was 
used to generate a computer model of an antibody protein (blue and 
orange, left) bound to a flu virus protein (yellow and green, right). 
This is a wireframe model modified by adding an “electron density 
map” in the region where the two proteins meet. Computer software 
was then used to back the images away from each other slightly.
Four Levels of Protein Structure
In spite of their great diversity, proteins share three superim-
posed levels of structure, known as primary, secondary, and ter-
tiary structure. A fourth level, quaternary structure, arises when a 
protein consists of two or more polypeptide chains. Figure 5.18  
describes these four levels of protein structure. Be sure to study 
this figure thoroughly before going on to the next section.
VISUAL SKILLS What do these computer models allow you to see 
about the two proteins? Mastering Biology Animation: Protein Structure
 Instructors: Additional 
questions related to this 
Visualizing Figure can be 
assigned in Mastering 
Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   127 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 129 ===

128 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
H
H
HH
C C CN
H
H
H
H
OO
C C CN N
R
+
R
10
152025
1 5
30
40 45 50
606570
80 85 90
100105110
125120
115
55
35
R
+H3NAmino end
Amino
acids
Primary structure of transthyretin
C Carboxyl end
O
GlyProThr Gly Thr Gly Glu Ser LysCys
Pro
Leu
Met
Val
LysVal
Gly
Glu
Leu
His
GlyLeu Thr Thr Glu Glu Glu PheValGlu Gly IleTyrLysValGlu Ile
Leu Asp AlaValArg Gly SerProAla Ile AsnValValHisVal
Phe
Arg
Lys
Ala
75
Asp
Thr
Lys
SerTyr
Tyr
Ser
Thr
Thr
AlaVal ValThr AsnProLysGlu
TrpLysAla Leu Gly Ile Ser ProPhe His Glu His Ala Glu Val
Ala Asp Asp ThrTrpGluProPhe Ala Ser GlyLysThr Ser Glu Ser
95
Phe
Thr
Ala
AsnAspSer GlyProArg ArgTyrThr Ile Ala Ala Leu Leu SerProTyrSer
Val
Ala
O
O–
Primary Structure Secondary Structure
Linear chain of amino acids Regions stabilized by hydrogen bonds 
between atoms of the polypeptide backbone
The primary structure is like the order of letters in a very long 
word. If left to chance, there would be 20127 different ways of 
making a polypeptide chain 127 amino acids long. However, the 
precise primary structure of a protein is determined not by the 
random linking of amino acids, but by inherited genetic 
information. The primary structure in turn dictates secondary 
structure (c helices and d pleated sheets) and tertiary structure,  
due to the chemical nature of the backbone and the side chains     
(R groups) of the amino acids along the polypeptide.
Most proteins have segments of their polypeptide chains repeatedly 
coiled or folded in patterns that contribute to the protein’s overall 
shape. These coils and folds, collectively referred to as secondary 
structure, are the result of hydrogen bonds between the repeat-
ing constituents of the polypeptide backbone (not the amino acid 
side chains). Within the backbone, the oxygen atoms have a partial 
negative charge, and the hydrogen atoms attached to the nitrogens 
have a partial positive charge (see Figure 2.14); therefore, hydrogen 
bonds can form between these atoms. Individually, these hydrogen 
bonds are weak, but because they are repeated many times over a 
relatively long region of the polypeptide chain, they can support a 
particular shape for that part of the protein.
    One such secondary structure is the c helix, a delicate coil held 
together by hydrogen bonding between every fourth amino acid, as 
shown above. Although each transthyretin polypeptide has only one
c helix region (see the Primary and Tertiary Structure sections),                              
other globular proteins have multiple stretches of c helix separated 
by nonhelical regions (see hemoglobin in the Quaternary Structure 
section). Some fibrous proteins, such as c-keratin, the structural 
protein of hair, have the c helix formation over most of their length.
    The  other secondary structure is the d pleated sheet. As shown 
above, two or more segments of the polypeptide chain lying side by 
side (called d strands) are connected by hydrogen bonds between 
parts of the two parallel segments. d pleated sheets make up the core 
of many globular proteins, as is the case for transthyretin (see 
Ter t iar y Str uc ture), and dominate some fibrous proteins, inc luding 
the silk protein of a spider’s web. The teamwork of so many hydro-
gen bonds makes each spider silk fiber stronger than a steel strand.
c Spiders secrete silk 
fibers made of a struc-
tural protein containing 
d pleated sheets, which 
allow the spiderweb to 
stretch and recoil.
d strand, often shown 
as a folded or flat arrow
pointing toward the 
carboxyl end
A region of d pleated sheet (made up of
adjacent d strands) in transthyretin
A region 
of c helix
in transthyretin
Hydrogen bond
Hydrogen bond
The primary structure of a protein is its sequence of amino 
acids. As an example, let’s consider transthyretin, a globular 
blood protein that transports vitamin A and one of the thyroid 
hormones. Transthyretin is made up of four identical polypeptide 
chains, each composed of 127 amino acids. Shown here is one of 
these chains unraveled for a closer look at its primary structure. 
Each of the 127 positions along the chain is occupied by one of 
the 20 amino acids, indicated here by its three-letter abbreviation.
d strands (orange), which together will form a d pleated sheet
Blue region will coil into an c helix
. Figure 5.18 Exploring Levels of Protein Structure
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   128 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 130 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  129
Collagen
Tertiary Structure Quaternary Structure
Three-dimensional shape stabilized by 
interactions between side chains
Association of two or more polypeptides 
(some proteins only)
Superimposed on the patterns of secondary structure is a protein’s 
tertiary structure, shown here in a ribbon model of the transthyretin 
polypeptide. While secondary structure involves interactions between 
backbone constituents, tertiary structure is the overall shape of 
a polypeptide resulting from interactions between the side chains 
(R groups) of the various amino acids. One type of interaction that 
contributes to tertiary structure is called—somewhat misleadingly—a 
hydrophobic interaction. As a polypeptide folds into its functional 
shape, amino acids with hydrophobic (nonpolar) side chains usually 
end up in clusters at the core of the protein, out of contact with water. 
Thus, a “hydrophobic interaction” is actually caused by the exclusion 
of nonpolar substances by water molecules. Once nonpolar amino 
acid side chains are close together, van der Waals interactions help 
hold them together. Meanwhile, hydrogen bonds between polar side 
chains and ionic bonds between positively and negatively charged side 
chains also help stabilize tertiary structure. These are all weak 
interactions in the aqueous cellular environment, but their cumulative 
effect helps give the protein a unique shape.
    Covalent bonds called disulfide bridges may further reinforce 
the shape of a protein. Disulfide bridges form where two cysteine 
monomers, which have sulfhydryl groups (—SH) on their side 
chains (see Figure 4.9), are brought close together by the folding of 
the protein. The sulfur of one cysteine bonds to the sulfur of the sec-
ond, and the disulfide bridge (—S—S—) rivets parts of the protein 
together (see yellow lines in Figure 5.16 ribbon model). All of these 
different kinds of interactions can contribute to the tertiary structure 
of a protein, as shown here in a small part of a hypothetical protein:
Some proteins consist of two or more polypeptide chains aggregated 
into one functional macromolecule. Quaternary structure is the 
overall protein structure that results from the aggregation of these 
polypeptide subunits. For example, shown above is the complete 
globular transthyretin protein, made up of its four polypeptides.
    Another example is collagen, which is a fibrous protein that has 
three identical helical polypeptides intertwined into a larger triple 
helix, giving the long fibers great strength. This suits collagen 
fibers to their function as the girders of connective tissue in skin, 
bone, tendons, ligaments, and other body parts. (Collagen accounts 
for 40% of the protein in a human body.)
    Hemoglobin, the oxygen-binding protein of red blood cells, is 
another example of a globular protein with quaternary structure.
It consists of four polypeptide subunits, 
two of one kind (c) and two of 
another kind (d). Both c and d
subunits consist primarily of 
c-helical secondary structure. 
Each subunit has a nonpolypeptide 
component, called heme, 
with an iron atom that 
binds oxygen.
Transthyretin
protein
(four identical
polypeptides)
Single
polypeptide
subunit
Transthyretin
polypeptide
d pleated sheet
Hydrogen
bond
Hydrophobic
interactions and
van der Waals
interactions
R groups are
colored as in 
Figure 5.14.
Ionic bond
Disulfide
bridge
Polypeptide 
backbone of 
small part of
a protein
OH
CH2
S
CH2
S
CH2
O
CH2
C
NH2 CH3CH3
CH
CH3CH3
CH
O–
CH2
O
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3
+
Heme
Iron
c subunit
d subunit
d subunit
c subunit
Hemoglobin
c helix
  Mastering Biology Animation: Proteins 
MP3 Tutor: Protein Structure and Function
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   129 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 131 ===

130 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Val1
His2
Leu3
Thr4
Pro5
Glu6
Glu7
Val1
His2
Leu3
Thr4
Pro5
Val6
Glu7
Normal 
hemoglobin
Sickle-cell
hemoglobin
Sickle-cell d subunit
Normal d subunit Normal hemoglobin proteins do
not associate with one another;
each carries oxygen.
c
cd
d
c
cd
d
5 om
Normal hemoglobinSickle-cell hemoglobin
Primary
Structure
Secondary and
Tertiary Structures
Quaternary
Structure Function Red Blood Cell Shape
Normal red blood 
cells are full of 
individual 
hemoglobin 
proteins.
Fibers of 
abnormal 
hemoglobin 
deform red 
blood cell into 
sickle shape.
Hydrophobic interactions between 
sickle-cell hemoglobin 
proteins lead to their 
aggregation 
into a fiber; 
capacity to 
carry oxygen 
is greatly 
reduced.
5 om
. Figure 5.19 A single amino acid substitution in a protein causes sickle-cell disease.
Sickle-Cell Disease: A Change in Primary Structure
Even a slight change in primary structure can affect a protein’s 
shape and ability to function. For instance, sickle-cell 
disease, an inherited blood disorder, is caused by the sub-
stitution of one amino acid (valine) for the normal one 
(glutamic acid) at the position of the sixth amino acid in the 
primary structure of hemoglobin, the protein that carries oxy-
gen in red blood cells. Normal red blood cells are disk-shaped, 
but in sickle-cell disease, the abnormal hemoglobin molecules 
tend to aggregate into chains, deforming some of the cells into 
a sickle shape (Figure 5.19). A person with the disease has peri-
odic “sickle-cell crises” when the angular cells clog tiny blood 
vessels, impeding blood flow. The toll taken on such patients 
is a dramatic example of how a simple change in protein struc-
ture can have devastating effects on protein function.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Considering the chemical characteristics of the amino acids 
valine and glutamic acid (see Figure 5.14), propose a possible explanation for the dramatic 
effect on protein function that occurs when valine is substituted for glutamic acid.
 Mastering Biology HHMI  
Animation: Sickle-Cell Disease 
This folding normally occurs as the protein is being synthe-
sized in the crowded environment within a cell, aided by 
other proteins. However, protein structure also depends on 
the physical and chemical conditions of the protein’s envi-
ronment. If the pH, salt concentration, temperature, or other 
aspects of its environment are altered, the weak chemical 
bonds and interactions within a protein may be destroyed, 
causing the protein to unravel and lose its native shape, a 
change called denaturation (Figure 5.20). Because it is mis-
shapen, the denatured protein is biologically inactive.
Most proteins become denatured if they are transferred 
from an aqueous environment to a nonpolar solvent, such as 
ether or chloroform; the polypeptide chain refolds so that its 
  Mastering Biology Interview with Linus 
Pauling: Winner of the Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry and the Nobel Peace Prize
What Determines Protein Structure?
You’ve learned that a unique shape endows each protein with 
a specific function. But what are the key factors determin-
ing protein structure? You already know most of the answer: 
A polypeptide chain of a given amino acid sequence can be 
arranged into a three-dimensional shape determined by the 
interactions responsible for secondary and tertiary structure. 
Normal protein Denatured protein
Denaturation
Renaturation
. Figure 5.20 Denaturation and renaturation of a protein. 
High temperatures or various chemical treatments will denature a 
protein, causing it to lose its shape and hence its ability to function. If 
the denatured protein remains dissolved, it may renature when the 
chemical and physical aspects of its environment are restored to normal.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   130 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 132 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  131
and bioinformatics (see Concept 5.6) are complementary 
approaches to understanding protein structure and function.
The structure of some proteins is difficult to determine 
for a simple reason: A growing body of biochemical research 
has revealed that a significant number of proteins, or regions 
of proteins, do not have a distinct 3-D structure until they 
interact with a target protein or other molecule. Their flexibil-
ity and indefinite structure are important for their function, 
which may require binding with different targets at different 
times. These proteins, which may account for 20–30% of 
mammalian proteins, are called intrinsically disordered proteins 
and are the focus of current research.
hydrophobic regions face outward toward the solvent. Other 
denaturation agents include chemicals that disrupt the hydro-
gen bonds, ionic bonds, and disulfide bridges that maintain 
a protein’s shape. Denaturation can also result from exces-
sive heat, which agitates the polypeptide chain enough to 
overpower the weak interactions that stabilize the structure. 
The white of an egg becomes opaque during cooking because 
the denatured proteins are insoluble and solidify. This also 
explains why excessively high fevers can be fatal: Proteins in 
the blood tend to denature at very high body temperatures.
When a protein in a test-tube solution has been denatured 
by heat or chemicals, it can sometimes return to its functional 
shape when the denaturing agent is removed. (Sometimes this 
is not possible: For example, a fried egg will not become lique-
fied when placed back into the refrigerator!) We can conclude 
that the information for building specific shape is intrinsic to 
the protein’s primary structure; this is often the case for small 
proteins. The sequence of amino acids determines the protein’s 
shape—where an ahelix can form, where b pleated sheets can 
exist, where disulfide bridges are located, where ionic bonds can 
form, and so on. But how does protein folding occur in the cell?
Protein Folding in the Cell
Biochemists now know the amino acid sequence for about 
160 million proteins, with about 4.5–5 million added each 
month, and the three-dimensional shape for about 40,000. 
Researchers have tried to correlate the primary structure of 
many proteins with their three-dimensional structure to dis-
cover the rules of protein folding. Unfortunately, however, 
the protein-folding process is not that simple. Most proteins 
probably go through several intermediate structures on their 
way to a stable shape, and looking at the mature structure 
does not reveal the stages of folding required to achieve that 
form. However, biochemists have developed methods for 
tracking a protein through such stages and learning more 
about this important process.
Misfolding of polypeptides in cells is a serious problem that 
has come under increasing scrutiny by medical researchers. 
Many diseases—such as cystic fibrosis, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, 
and mad cow disease—are associated with an accumulation 
of misfolded proteins. In fact, misfolded versions of the trans-
thyretin protein featured in Figure 5.18 have been implicated in 
several diseases, including one form of senile dementia.
Even when scientists have a correctly folded protein in 
hand, determining its exact three-dimensional structure is 
not simple, for a single protein has thousands of atoms. The 
method most commonly used to determine the 3-D structure 
of a protein is X-ray crystallography, which depends on the 
diffraction of an X-ray beam by the atoms of a crystallized mol-
ecule. Using this technique, scientists can build a 3-D model 
that shows the exact position of every atom in a protein mol-
ecule (Figure 5.21). Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spec-
troscopy, cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM; see Concept 7.1) 
Application S c i e n t i s t s  u s e  X - r a y  c r y s t a l l o g r a p h y  t o  d e t e r-
mine the three-dimensional (3-D) structure of macromol-
ecules such as nucleic acids and proteins.
Technique R e s e a r c h e r s  a i m  a n  X - r a y  b e a m  t h r o u g h  a  c r y s t a l-
lized protein or nucleic acid. The atoms of the crystal diffract 
(bend) the X-rays into an orderly array that a digital detector 
records as a pattern of spots called an X-ray diffraction pat-
tern, an example of which is shown here.
Diffracted 
X-rays
Digital detector X-ray diffraction
pattern
Crystal
X-ray
beam
X-ray
source
Results Using data from 
X-ray diffraction patterns 
and the sequence of mono-
mers determined by chemi-
cal methods, researchers 
can build a 3-D computer 
model of the macro-
molecule being studied, 
such as the four-subunit 
protein transthyretin (see 
Figure 5.18) shown here.
X-Ray Crystallography
. Figure 5.21 Research Method 
CONCEPT CHECK 5.4
1. What parts of a polypeptide participate in the bonds that 
hold together secondary structure? Tertiary structure?
2. Thus far in the chapter, the Greek letters a and b have been 
used to specify at least three different pairs of structures. 
Name and briefly describe them.
3. Each amino acid has a carboxyl group and an amino group. 
Are these groups present in a polypeptide? Explain.
4. WHAT IF? Where would you expect a polypeptide region 
rich in the amino acids valine, leucine, and isoleucine to be 
located in a folded polypeptide? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   131 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 133 ===

132 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
functions of some recently discovered RNA molecules; the 
stretches of DNA that direct synthesis of these RNAs are also 
considered genes (see Concept 18.3).
The Components of Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are macromolecules that exist as polymers 
called polynucleotides (Figure 5.23a). As indicated by 
the name, each polynucleotide consists of monomers called 
nucleotides. A nucleotide, in general, is composed of three 
parts: a five-carbon sugar (a pentose), a nitrogen-containing 
(nitrogenous) base, and one to three phosphate groups 
(Figure 5.23b). The beginning monomer used to build a poly-
nucleotide has three phosphate groups, but two are lost dur-
ing the polymerization process. The portion of a nucleotide 
without any phosphate groups is called a nucleoside.
To understand the structure of a single nucleotide, let’s 
first consider the nitrogenous bases (Figure 5.23c). Each 
nitrogenous base has one or two rings that include nitrogen 
atoms. (They are called nitrogenous bases because the nitro-
gen atoms tend to take up H+ from solution, thus acting as 
bases.) There are two families of nitrogenous bases: pyrimi-
dines and purines. A pyrimidine has one six-membered ring 
of carbon and nitrogen atoms. The members of the pyrimi-
dine family are cytosine (C), thymine (T), and uracil (U). 
Nucleic acids store, transmit, and 
help express hereditary information
If the primary structure of polypeptides determines a protein’s 
shape, what determines primary structure? The amino acid 
sequence of a polypeptide is programmed by a discrete unit of 
inheritance known as a gene. Genes consist of DNA, which 
belongs to the class of compounds called nucleic acids. Nucleic 
acids are polymers made of monomers called nucleotides.
The Roles of Nucleic Acids
The two types of nucleic acids, deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), enable living organ-
isms to reproduce their complex components from one gen-
eration to the next. Unique among molecules, DNA provides 
directions for its own replication. DNA also directs RNA 
synthesis and, through RNA, controls protein synthesis; this 
entire process is called gene expression (Figure 5.22).
DNA is the genetic material that organisms inherit from 
their parents. Each chromosome contains one long DNA 
molecule, usually carrying several hundred or more genes. 
When a cell reproduces itself by dividing, its DNA molecules 
are copied and passed along from one generation of cells to 
the next. The information that programs all the cell’s activi-
ties is encoded in the structure of the DNA. The DNA, how-
ever, is not directly involved in running the operations of 
the cell, any more than computer software by itself can read 
the bar code on a box of cereal. Just as a scanner is needed to 
read a bar code, proteins are required to implement genetic 
programs. The molecular hardware of the cell—the tools that 
carry out biological functions—consists mostly of proteins. 
For example, the oxygen carrier in red blood cells is the pro-
tein hemoglobin that you saw earlier (see Figure 5.18), not 
the DNA that specifies its structure.
How does RNA, the other type of nucleic acid, fit into gene 
expression, the flow of genetic information from DNA to pro-
teins? A given gene along a DNA molecule can direct synthesis 
of a type of RNA called messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA mol-
ecule interacts with the cell’s protein-synthesizing machinery 
to direct production of a polypeptide, which folds into all or 
part of a protein. We can summarize the flow of genetic infor-
mation as DNA S RNA S protein (see Figure 5.22). The sites 
of protein synthesis are cellular structures called ribosomes. In 
a eukaryotic cell, ribosomes are in the cytoplasm—the region 
between the nucleus and the cell’s outer boundary, the plasma 
membrane—but DNA resides in the nucleus. Messenger RNA 
conveys genetic instructions for building proteins from the 
nucleus to the cytoplasm. Prokaryotic cells lack nuclei but still 
use mRNA to convey a message from the DNA to ribosomes 
and other cellular equipment that translate the coded informa-
tion into amino acid sequences. Later, you’ll read about other 
1
mRNA
Ribosome
Amino
acidsPolypeptide
CYTOPLASM
DNA
mRNA
NUCLEUS
Synthesis of
mRNA in the 
nucleus 
1
Movement of
mRNA into cytoplasm
via nuclear pore 
2
Synthesis of 
protein using 
information
carried on
mRNA 
3
. Figure 5.22 Gene expression: DNASRNASprotein. In a 
eukaryotic cell, DNA in the nucleus programs protein production in 
the cytoplasm by dictating synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA).
CONCEPT 5.5
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Gene Expression
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   132 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 134 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  133
Purines are larger, with a six-membered ring fused to a five-
membered ring. The purines are adenine (A) and guanine (G). 
The specific pyrimidines and purines differ in the chemical 
groups attached to the rings. Adenine, guanine, and cytosine 
are found in both DNA and RNA; thymine is found only in 
DNA and uracil only in RNA.
Now let’s add the sugar to which the nitrogenous base 
is attached. In DNA the sugar is deoxyribose; in RNA it is 
ribose (see Figure 5.23c). The only difference between these 
two sugars is that deoxyribose lacks an oxygen atom on the 
second carbon in the ring, hence the name deoxyribose.
So far, we have built a nucleoside (base plus sugar). To 
complete the construction of a nucleotide, we attach one 
to three phosphate groups to the 5r carbon of the sugar (the 
carbon numbers in the sugar include r, the prime symbol; 
see Figure 5.23b). With one phosphate, this is a nucleoside 
monophosphate, more often called a nucleotide.
Nucleotide Polymers
The linkage of nucleotides into a polynucleotide involves 
a condensation reaction. (You will learn the details in 
Concept 16.2.) In the polynucleotide, adjacent nucleotides 
are joined by a phosphodiester linkage, which consists of 
(a) Polynucleotide, or nucleic acid
Nucleotide monomer in a 
polynucleotide
(c) Nucleoside components
NH2
NH2
NH2
C C
N
H
O
CH
CH
N
C
N
H
O
C
CH
HN
C
CH3
O
C
N
H
O
CH
CH
HN
C
O
O
Cytosine (C)
NITROGENOUS BASES
Pyrimidines
SUGARS
Purines
Thymine (T, in DNA)
C
N
C
C
N
CH
C
Adenine (A)
Deoxyribose (in DNA) Ribose (in RNA)
N
N
H
C
N
C
NH
C
HC HC
N
N
H
Guanine (G)
Nitrogenous
base
Nucleoside
5¿ end
3¿ end
5¿C
Sugar
(pentose)
Phosphate
group
Sugar-phosphate backbone
(on blue background)
O
O–
P–OO
OH
CH2O
O
O
O
O 4¿ 1¿
5¿
3¿2¿
HOCH2 HOCH2OH
HH
H
OH
H
H
O
4¿ 1¿
5¿
3¿2¿
OH
HH
H
OH
H
OH
O
Uracil (U, in RNA)
3¿C
3¿C
1¿C
5¿C
5¿C
3¿C (b)
. Figure 5.23 Components of nucleic acids. (a) A polynucleotide has a sugar-
phosphate backbone with variable appendages, the nitrogenous bases. (b) In a 
polynucleotide, each nucleotide monomer includes a nitrogenous base, a sugar, 
and a phosphate group. Note that carbon numbers in the sugar include primes (r). 
(c) A nucleoside includes a nitrogenous base (purine or pyrimidine) and a five-
carbon sugar (deoxyribose or ribose).
a phosphate group that covalently links the sugars of two 
nucleotides. This bonding results in a repeating pattern of 
sugar-phosphate units called the sugar-phosphate backbone 
(see Figure 5.23a). (Note that the nitrogenous bases are not 
part of the backbone.) The two free ends of the polymer are 
distinctly different from each other. One end has a phosphate 
attached to a 5r carbon, and the other end has a hydroxyl 
group on a 3r carbon; we refer to these as the 5r end and the 
3r end, respectively. We can say that a polynucleotide has a 
built-in directionality along its sugar-phosphate backbone, 
from 5r to 3r, somewhat like a one-way street. The bases are 
attached all along the sugar-phosphate backbone.
The sequence of bases along a DNA (or mRNA) polymer is 
unique for each gene and provides very specific information to 
the cell. Because genes are hundreds to thousands of nucleo-
tides long, the number of possible base sequences is effectively 
limitless. The information carried by the gene is encoded in 
its specific sequence of the four DNA bases. For example, the 
sequence 5r-AGGTAACTT-3r means one thing, whereas the 
sequence 5r-CGCTTTAAC-3r has a different meaning. (Entire 
genes, of course, are much longer.) The linear order of bases 
in a gene specifies the amino acid sequence—the primary 
structure—of a protein, which in turn specifies that protein’s 
3-D structure, thus enabling its function in the cell.
  Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: The Chemical Structure of DNA 
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   133 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 135 ===

134 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
three-dimensional shape necessary for its function. Consider, 
for example, the type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA), 
which brings amino acids to the ribosome during the syn-
thesis of a polypeptide. A tRNA molecule is about 80 nucleo-
tides in length. Its functional shape results from base pairing 
between nucleotides where complementary stretches of the 
molecule can run antiparallel to each other (Figure 5.24b).
Note that in RNA, adenine (A) pairs with uracil (U); thy-
mine (T) is not present in RNA. Another difference between 
RNA and DNA is that DNA almost always exists as a double 
helix, whereas RNA molecules are more variable in shape. 
RNAs are versatile molecules, and many biologists believe 
RNA may have preceded DNA as the carrier of genetic infor-
mation in early forms of life (see Concept 25.1).
The Structures of DNA and RNA Molecules
A DNA molecule has two polynucleotides, or “strands,” that 
wind around an imaginary axis, forming a double helix 
(Figure 5.24a). The two sugar-phosphate backbones run in 
opposite 5r S 3r directions from each other; this arrangement 
is referred to as antiparallel, somewhat like a divided high-
way. The sugar-phosphate backbones are on the outside of 
the helix, and the nitrogenous bases are paired in the interior 
of the helix. The two strands are held together by hydrogen 
bonds between the paired bases (see Figure 5.24a). Most DNA 
molecules are very long, with thousands or even millions of 
base pairs. The one long DNA double helix in a eukaryotic 
chromosome includes many genes, each one a particular seg-
ment of the double-stranded molecule.
In base pairing, only certain bases in the double helix are 
compatible with each other. Adenine (A) in one strand always 
pairs with thymine (T) in the other, and guanine (G) always 
pairs with cytosine (C). Reading the sequence of bases along 
one strand of the double helix would tell us the sequence of 
bases along the other strand. If a stretch of one strand has the 
base sequence 5r-AGGTCCG-3r, then the base-pairing rules 
tell us that the same stretch of the other strand must have the 
sequence 3r-TCCAGGC-5r. The two strands of the double helix 
are complementary, each the predictable counterpart of the other. 
It is this feature of DNA that makes it possible to generate two 
identical copies of each DNA molecule in a cell that is preparing 
to divide. When the cell divides, the copies are distributed to 
the daughter cells, making them genetically identical to the par-
ent cell. Thus, the structure of DNA accounts for its function of 
transmitting genetic information whenever a cell reproduces.
RNA molecules, by contrast, exist as single strands. 
Complementary base pairing can occur, however, between 
regions of two RNA molecules or even between two stretches 
of nucleotides in the same RNA molecule. In fact, base pairing 
within an RNA molecule allows it to take on the particular 
G
(a) DNA (b) Transfer RNA
AT
CG
C
T
CG
TA
U
A
A
Sugar-phosphate
backbones
Base pair joined
by hydrogen bonding
Base pair joined
by hydrogen bonding
Hydrogen bonds
5¿ 3¿
5¿3¿
G
G
C
C
c Figure 5.24 The structures of DNA and 
tRNA molecules. (a) The DNA molecule 
is usually a double helix, with the sugar-
phosphate backbones of the antiparallel 
polynucleotide strands (symbolized here 
by blue ribbons) on the outside of the 
helix. Hydrogen bonds between pairs of 
nitrogenous bases hold the two strands 
together. As illustrated here with symbolic 
shapes for the bases, adenine (A) can pair 
only with thymine (T), and guanine (G) can 
pair only with cytosine (C). Each DNA strand 
in this figure is the structural equivalent of the 
polynucleotide diagrammed in Figure 5.23a. 
(b) A tRNA molecule has a roughly L-shaped 
structure due to complementary base pairing 
of antiparallel stretches of RNA. In RNA, A 
pairs with U.
 Mastering Biology HHMI  
Animation: Paired DNA Strands 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Nucleic Acid Structure
CONCEPT CHECK 5.5
1. DRAW IT In Figure 5.23a, number all the carbons of the top 
three nucleotides (use primes), circle the nitrogenous bases, 
and star the phosphates.
2. DRAW IT A region along one DNA strand has this sequence 
of nitrogenous bases: 5r-TAGGCCT-3r. Write down its comple-
mentary strand, labeling the 5r and 3r ends.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 5.6
Genomics and proteomics have 
transformed biological inquiry 
and applications
Experimental work in the first half of the 20th century estab-
lished the role of DNA as the carrier of genetic information, 
passed from generation to generation, that specified the 
functioning of living cells and organisms. Once the structure 
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   134 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 136 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  135
Perhaps the most significant impact of genomics and 
proteomics on the field of biology as a whole has been their 
contributions to our understanding of evolution. In addition 
to confirming evidence for evolution from the study of fos-
sils and characteristics of currently existing species, genomics 
has helped us tease out relationships among different groups 
of organisms that had not been resolved by previous types of 
evidence, and thus infer evolutionary history.
DNA and Proteins as Tape Measures  
of Evolution
EVOLUTION We are accustomed to thinking of shared 
traits, such as hair and milk production in mammals, as evi-
dence of shared ancestry. Because DNA carries heritable infor-
mation in the form of genes, sequences of genes and their 
protein products document the hereditary background of an 
organism. The linear sequences of nucleotides in DNA mol-
ecules are passed from parents to offspring; these sequences 
determine the amino acid sequences of proteins. As a result, 
siblings have greater similarity in their DNA and proteins 
than do unrelated individuals of the same species.
Given our evolutionary view of life, we can extend this 
concept of “molecular genealogy” to relationships between 
species: We would expect two species that appear to be closely 
related based on anatomical evidence (and possibly fossil 
evidence) to also share a greater proportion of their DNA and 
protein sequences than do less closely related species. In fact, 
that is the case. An example is the comparison of the b poly-
peptide chain of human hemoglobin with the corresponding 
hemoglobin polypeptide in other vertebrates. In this chain of 
146 amino acids, humans and gorillas differ in just 1 amino 
acid, while humans and frogs, more distantly related, differ in 
67 amino acids. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can apply 
this sort of reasoning to additional species. And this conclu-
sion holds true as well when comparing whole genomes: The 
human genome is 95–98% identical to that of the chimpan-
zee, but only roughly 85% identical to that of the mouse, a 
more distant evolutionary relative. Molecular biology has 
added a new tape measure to the toolkit biologists use to 
assess evolutionary kinship.
Comparing genomic sequences has practical applica-
tions as well. In the Problem-Solving Exercise, you can see  
how this type of genomic analysis can help you detect 
consumer fraud.
of the DNA molecule was described in 1953, and the linear 
sequence of nucleotide bases was understood to specify 
the amino acid sequence of proteins, biologists sought to 
“decode” genes by learning their nucleotide sequences  
(often called “base sequences”).
The first chemical techniques for DNA sequencing, 
or determining the sequence of nucleotides along a 
DNA strand, one by one, were developed in the 1970s. 
Researchers began to study gene sequences, gene by gene, 
and the more they learned, the more questions they had: 
How was expression of genes regulated? Genes and their 
protein products clearly interacted with each other, but 
how? What was the function, if any, of the DNA that is not 
part of genes? To fully understand the genetic function-
ing of a living organism, the entire sequence of the full 
complement of DNA, the organism’s genome, would be most 
enlightening. In spite of the apparent impracticality of this 
idea, in the late 1980s several prominent biologists put 
forth an audacious proposal to launch a project that would 
sequence the entire human genome—all 3 billion bases of it! 
This endeavor began in 1990 and was effectively completed 
in the early 2000s.
An unplanned but profound side benefit of this project—
the Human Genome Project—was the rapid development of 
faster and less expensive methods of sequencing. This trend 
has continued: The cost for sequencing 1 million bases in 
2001, well over $5,000, has decreased to less than $0.02 in 
2017. And a human genome, the first of which took over 10 
years to sequence, could be completed at today’s pace in day 
or less (Figure 5.25). The number of genomes that have been 
fully sequenced has exploded, generating reams of data and 
prompting development of bioinformatics, the use of com-
puter software and other computational tools that can handle 
and analyze these large data sets.
The reverberations of these developments have trans-
formed the study of biology and related fields. Biologists 
often look at problems by analyzing large sets of genes or 
even comparing whole genomes of different species, an 
approach called genomics. A similar analysis of large sets of 
proteins, including their sequences, is called proteomics. 
(Protein sequences can be determined either by using bio-
chemical techniques or by translating the DNA sequences 
that code for them.) These approaches permeate all fields of 
biology, some examples of which are shown in Figure 5.26.
.
 Figure 5.25  
Automatic DNA-
sequencing 
machines and 
abundant 
computing power 
enable rapid 
sequencing of genes 
and genomes.
CONCEPT CHECK 5.6
1. How would sequencing the entire genome of an organ-
ism help scientists to understand how that organism 
functioned?
2. Given the function of DNA, why would you expect two spe-
cies with very similar traits to also have very similar genomes?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   135 3/14/20   1:45 AM

=== SIDE 137 ===

Hippopotamus
5hort-Ƃnned pilot whale
Nucleotide sequencing and 
the analysis of large sets 
of genes and proteins 
can be done rapidly and 
inexpensively due to 
advances in technology 
and information process-
ing. Taken together, 
genomics and proteomics have 
advanced our understanding of 
biology across many different Ƃelds. 
A major aim of evolutionary biology is to understand 
the relationships among species, both living and 
extinct. For example, genome sequence comparisons 
have identiﬁed the hippopotamus as the land mammal 
sharing the most recent common ancestor with whales. 
(See Figure 21.20.)
Most plant species exist in a 
mutually beneﬁcial partnership 
with fungi (right) and bacteria 
associated with the plants’ roots; 
these interactions improve plant 
growth. Genome sequencing 
and analysis of gene expression 
have allowed characterization of 
plant-associated communities. 
Such studies will help advance our 
understanding of such interactions 
and may improve agricultural 
practices. (See the Chapter 31 
Scientiﬁc Skills Exercise and 
Identifying the genetic basis for human diseases like cancer helps 
researchers focus their search for potential future treatments. 
Currently, sequencing the sets of genes expressed in an individual’s 
tumor can allow a more
targeted approach to 
treating the cancer, a
type of “personalized 
medicine.” (See 
Figures 12.20 and 
18.27.)
New DNA sequencing 
techniques have allowed 
decoding of minute 
quantities of DNA found 
in ancient tissues from 
our extinct relatives, the 
Neanderthals (Homo 
neanderthalensis). 
Sequencing the Neanderthal 
genome has informed our 
understanding of their physical 
appearance  (as in this reconstruction), as 
well  as their relationship with modern 
humans. (See Figures 34.51 and 34.52.)
The tools of molecular genetics and     
genomics are increasingly used 
by forensic ecologists to identify 
which species of animals and 
plants are killed illegally. 
In one case, genomic 
sequences of DNA from 
illegal shipments of 
elephant tusks were  
used to track 
down poachers 
and pinpoint 
the territory 
where they were 
operating. (See 
Figure 56.8.)
Conservation Biology
Paleontology
Evolution
Medical Science
Species Interactions
  Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Making  
of the Fittest: The Birth and Death of Genes (Icefish) 
Contributions of Genomics 
and Proteomics to Biology
/uni25BC Figure 5.26
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
Considering the examples provided here, describe how the 
approaches of genomics and proteomics help us to address a 
variety of biological questions.
MAKE CONNECTIONS
136 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   136 3/14/20   1:46 AM

=== SIDE 138 ===

Scientific Skills Exercise
Analyzing Polypeptide Sequence Data
Are Rhesus Monkeys or Gibbons More Closely Related to 
Humans? In this exercise, you will look at amino acid sequence data 
for the b polypeptide chain of hemoglobin, often called b-globin. 
You will then interpret the data to hypothesize whether the monkey 
or the gibbon is more closely related to humans.
How Such Experiments Are Done Researchers can isolate the 
polypeptide of interest from an organism and then determine 
the amino acid sequence. More frequently, the DNA of the rel-
evant gene is sequenced, and the amino acid sequence of the 
polypeptide is deduced from the DNA sequence of its gene.
Data from the Experiments In the data below, the letters give 
the sequence of the 146 amino acids in b-globin from humans, 
Species Alignment of Amino Acid Sequences of d-globin
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
Human
Monkey
Gibbon
VHLTPEEKSA
VHLTPEEKNA
VHLTPEEKSA
PDAVMGNPKV
PDAVMGNPKV
PDAVMGNPKV
ENFRLLGNVL
ENFRLLGNVL
ENFRLLGNVL
VTALWGKVNV
VTTLWGKVNV
VTALWGKVNV
KAHGKKVLGA
KAHGKKVLGA
KAHGKKVLGA
VCVLAHHFGK
VCVLAHHFGK
VCVLAHHFGK
DEVGGEALGR
DEVGGEALGR
DEVGGEALGR
FSDGLAHLDN
FSDGLNHLDN
FSDGLAHLDN
EFTPPVQAAY
EFTPPVQAAY
EFTPPVQAAY
LLVVYPWTQR
LLLVYPWTQR 
LLVVYPWTQR
LKGTFATLSE
LKGTFAQLSE
LKGTFAQLSE
QKVVAGVANA
QKVVAGVANA
QKVVAGVANA
FFESFGDLST
FFESFGDLSS
FFESFGDLST
LHCDKLHVDP
LHCDKLHVDP
LHCDKLHVDP
LAHKYH
LAHKYH
LAHKYH
1
1
1
51
51
51
101
101
101
Data from Human: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AAA21113.1; rhesus monkey: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/protein/122634; gibbon: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/122616
rhesus monkeys, and gibbons. Because a complete sequence 
would not fit on one line here, the sequences are divided into 
three segments: amino acids 1–50, 51–100, and 101–146. The 
sequences for the three different species are aligned so that 
you can compare them easily. For example, you can see that for 
all three species, the first amino acid is V (valine) and the 146th 
amino acid is H (histidine).
2. For each nonhuman species, what percent 
of its amino acids are identical to the human 
sequence of b-globin?
3. Based on these data alone, state a 
hypothesis for which of these two species is 
more closely related to humans. What is your 
reasoning?
4. What other evidence could you use to 
support your hypothesis?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills  
Exercise can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Scan the monkey and gibbon sequences, letter by letter, 
circling any amino acids that do not match the human 
sequence. (a) How many amino acids differ between 
the monkey and the human sequences? 
(b) Between the gibbon and human?
/uni25B6 Human /uni25B6  Rhesus 
monkey
/uni25B6 Gibbon
In this exercise, you will investigate whether a piece of salmon has been 
fraudulently labeled.
Your Approach The principle guiding your investigation is that DNA sequences 
from within a species or from closely related species are more similar to each other 
than are sequences from more distantly related species.
Your Data You’ve been sold a piece of salmon labeled as coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch). To see whether your fish was labeled correctly, you will com-
pare a short DNA sequence from your sample with known sequences from the same 
gene for three salmon species. The sequences are as follows:
Known
sequences
Sample labeled as O. kisutch (coho salmon)
O. kisutch (coho salmon)
O. keta (chum salmon)
Salmo salar (Atlantic salmon)
Data from the International Barcode of Life.
5 ¿-CGGCACCGCCCTAAGTCTCT-3 ¿
5 ¿-AGGCACCGCCCTAAGTCTAC-3 ¿
5 ¿-AGGCACCGCCCTGAGCCTAC-3 ¿
5 ¿-CGGCACCGCCCTAAGTCTCT-3 ¿
Your Analysis
1. Circle any bases in the known sequences that do not match the sequence from 
your fish sample.
2. How many bases differ between (a) O. kisutch and your fish sample? (b) O. keta 
and the sample? (c) S. salar and the sample?
3. For each known sequence, what percentage of its bases are identical to your 
sample?
4. Based on these data alone, state a hypothesis for the species identity of your 
sample. What is your reasoning?
  Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving 
Exercise can be assigned in Chapter 5 of 
Mastering Biology. A more extensive “Solve It” 
tutorial is in Chapter 22 of Mastering Biology.
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Are you a victim of fish fraud?
When buying salmon, perhaps you prefer the 
more expensive wild-caught Pacific salmon 
(Oncorhynchus species) over farmed Atlantic 
salmon (Salmo salar). But studies reveal that 
about 40% of the time, you aren’t getting the 
fish you paid for!
 137
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   137 3/14/20   1:46 AM

=== SIDE 139 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
5 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 5.1
Macromolecules are polymers, built from  
monomers (pp. 115–116)
• Large carbohydrates (polysaccharides), proteins, and nucleic acids are 
polymers, chains of monomers. Components of lipids vary. Many 
monomers can form larger molecules by dehydration reactions,  
in which water molecules are released. Polymers can disassemble 
by the reverse process, hydrolysis. An immense variety of poly-
mers can be built from a small set of monomers.
? What is the fundamental basis for the differences between large 
carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids?
Large Biological Molecules Components Examples Functions
CONCEPT 5.2
Carbohydrates serve as fuel 
and building material  
(pp. 116–120)
? Compare starch and cellulose. What role 
does each play in the human body? Monosaccharide monomer
OH
H
H OH
O
H
CH2OH
OH H
H
HO
Monosaccharides:  glucose, 
fructose
Fuel; carbon sources that can be 
converted to other molecules or 
combined into polymersDisaccharides: lactose, sucrose
Polysaccharides:
• Cellulose (plants)
• Starch (plants)
• Glycogen (animals)
• Chitin (animals and fungi)
• Cellulose strengthens plant cell 
walls
• Starch stores glucose for energy 
in plants
• Glycogen stores glucose for 
energy in animals
• Chitin strengthens animal 
exoskeletons and fungal cell walls
CONCEPT 5.3
Lipids are a diverse group  
of hydrophobic molecules  
(pp. 120–123)
? Why are lipids not considered to be 
polymers or macromolecules?
Glycerol 3 fatty
acids
Triacylglycerols (fats or oils): 
glycerol + three fatty acids
Important energy source
    
2 fatty 
acids
Head
withP
Phospholipids: glycerol +  
phosphate group + two fatty 
acids
Lipid bilayers of membranes
Hydrophobic
tails
Hydrophilic
heads
Steroid backbone Steroids: four fused rings with 
attached chemical groups
• Component of cell membranes 
(cholesterol)
• Signaling molecules that travel 
through the body (hormones)
CONCEPT 5.4
Proteins include a diversity of 
structures, resulting in a wide 
range of functions (pp. 123–131)
? Explain the basis for the great diversity  
of proteins.
OH
O
CCC
R
H
N
H
H
Amino acid monomer
 (20 types)
• Enzymes
• Defensive proteins
• Storage proteins
• Transport proteins
• Hormones
• Receptor proteins
• Motor proteins
• Structural proteins
• Catalyze chemical reactions
• Protect against disease
• Store amino acids
• Transport substances
• Coordinate organismal responses
• Receive signals from outside cell
• Function in cell movement
• Provide structural support
CONCEPT 5.5
Nucleic acids store, transmit, 
and help express hereditary 
information (pp. 132–134)
? What role does complementary base 
pairing play in nucleic acids?
Nitrogenous base
Sugar
Nucleotide (monomer
of a polynucleotide)
Phosphate
group
CH2OP
DNA: 
• Sugar = deoxyribose
• Nitrogenous bases = C, G, A, T
• Usually double-stranded
Stores hereditary information
RNA: 
• Sugar = ribose
• Nitrogenous bases = C, G, A, U
• Usually single-stranded
Various functions in gene  
expression, including carrying  
instructions from DNA to 
ribosomes
138 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   138 3/14/20   1:46 AM

=== SIDE 140 ===

 CHAPTER 5  Biological Macromolecules and Lipids  139
antiparallel to the first. Hint: After you draw the first strand 
vertically, turn the paper upside down; it is easier to draw the 
second strand from the 5/uni2032 toward the 3/uni2032 direction as you go 
from top to bottom.
10. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Comparisons of amino acid 
sequences can shed light on the evolutionary divergence of 
related species. If you were comparing two living species, would 
you expect all proteins to show the same degree of divergence? 
Why or why not? Justify your answer.
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Suppose you are provided with a 
sequence of nucleotides. How would you determine if the 
sequence is of mRNA, tRNA, or DNA molecules?
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Proteins, 
which have diverse functions in a cell, are all polymers of the 
same kinds of monomers—amino acids. Write a short essay 
(100–150 words) that discusses how the structure of amino 
acids allows this one type of polymer to perform so many 
functions.
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Given that the function of egg yolk is to nourish and support 
the developing chick, explain why egg yolks are so high in fat, 
protein, and cholesterol.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Genomics and proteomics have transformed 
biological inquiry and applications (pp. 134–137)
• Recent technological advances in DNA sequencing have given 
rise to genomics, an approach that analyzes large sets of genes 
or whole genomes, and proteomics, a similar approach for large 
sets of proteins. Bioinformatics is the use of computational 
tools and computer software to analyze these large data sets.
• The more closely two species are related evolutionarily, the more 
similar their DNA sequences are. DNA sequence data confirm 
models of evolution based on fossils and anatomical evidence.
? Given the sequences of a particular gene in fruit flies, fish, mice, and 
humans, predict the relative similarity of the human sequence to that of 
each of the other species.
CONCEPT 5.6
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. Construct a table that organizes the following terms and label 
the columns and rows.
Monosaccharides
Fatty acids
Amino acids
Nucleotides
Polypeptides
Triacylglycerols
Polynucleotides
Polysaccharides
Phosphodiester linkages
Peptide bonds
Glycosidic linkages
Ester linkages
9. DRAW IT Copy the polynucleotide strand in Figure 
5.23a and label the bases G, T, C, and T, starting from the 
5r end. Assuming this is a DNA polynucleotide, now draw 
the complementary strand, using the same symbols for 
phosphates (circles), sugars (pentagons), and bases. Label 
the bases. Draw arrows showing the 5/uni2032 S 3/uni2032 direction of each 
strand. Use the arrows to make sure the second strand is 
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   139 3/14/20   1:46 AM

=== SIDE 141 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C05_PRF.indd   140 3/14/20   1:46 AM

=== SIDE 142 ===

141
Figure 6.1 The green glowing spots on the outside of this Brazilian termite mound 
are larvae of the click beetle, Pyrophorus nyctophanus. These larvae convert the 
energy stored in organic molecules to light, a process called bioluminescence, which 
attracts termites that the larvae eat. Bioluminescence and other metabolic activities 
in a cell are energy transformations that are subject to physical laws.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 6
• Animation: Exergonic and Endergonic 
Reactions
• Figure 6.10 Walkthrough: How ATP Drives 
Chemical Work
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: Energy Transformations
• Tutorial: How Enzymes Function
Study Tip
Make a table: Fill in the following 
table for each process you read about 
in this chapter, such as water spilling 
over a dam or a chemical reaction.
6.1 An organism’s metabolism transforms 
matter and energy p. 142
6.2 The free-energy change of a reaction 
tells us whether or not the reaction 
occurs spontaneously p. 145
6.3 ATP powers cellular work by coupling 
exergonic reactions to endergonic 
reactions p. 148
6.4 Enzymes speed up metabolic reactions 
by lowering energy barriers p. 151
6.5 Regulation of enzyme activity helps 
control metabolism p. 157
KEY CONCEPTS
Energy and Life6
Process Starting
Materials;
Relative
Energy
Level
Ending
Materials;
Relative
Energy
Level
Will this
process occur
spontaneously
(without an
input of energy)?
Water
spilling
over a
dam
Hydrolysis
of ATP
(Figure
6.9)
Water at
the bottom
of a dam;
lower energy
level
Water at
the top
of a dam;
higher
energy level
Yes
6JGƂTUVNCYoH
VJGTOod[nCOiEU
Energy can be 
transferred and 
transformed, but it 
cannot be created 
or destroyed.
For example:
How do the laws of thermodynamics relate to
biological processes?
 Light energy 
from the sun 
Chemical energy in organic 
molecules in plants
Transformed 
by plants to
Transformed 
by termites to
Transformed by 
click beetle larvae to
Chemical energy in organic 
molecules in termites
Light energy produced
by bioluminescence
Heat
Heat
Heat
6JGUGEondNCYoHVJGTOod[nCOiEU 
Every energy transfer or transformation increases 
the entropy (disorder) of the universe. For 
example, during every energy transformation, 
some energy is converted to thermal energy and 
released as heat:
Plant using light 
to make organic 
molecules
Termite digesting 
plant and making 
new molecules
Click beetle larva
digesting termite 
and emitting light
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   141 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 143 ===

142 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
principles, the concepts demonstrated by these examples 
also apply to bioenergetics, the study of how energy flows 
through living organisms.
Forms of Energy
Energy is the capacity to cause change. In everyday life, energy 
is important because some forms of energy can be used to do 
work—that is, to move matter against opposing forces, such 
as gravity and friction. Put another way, energy is the ability 
to rearrange a collection of matter. For example, you expend 
energy to turn the pages of this book, and your cells expend 
energy in transporting certain substances across membranes. 
Energy exists in various forms, and the work of life depends on 
the ability of cells to transform energy from one form to another.
Energy can be associated with the relative motion of objects; 
this energy is called kinetic energy. Moving objects can per-
form work by imparting motion to other matter: A  pool player 
uses the motion of the cue stick to push the cue ball, which in 
turn moves the other balls; water gushing through a dam turns 
turbines; and the contraction of leg muscles pushes bicycle 
pedals. Thermal energy is kinetic energy associated with the 
random movement of atoms or molecules; thermal energy in 
transfer from one object to another is called heat. Light is also 
a type of energy that can be harnessed to perform work, such as 
powering photosynthesis in green plants.
An object not presently moving may still possess energy. 
Energy that is not kinetic is called potential energy; it is 
energy that matter possesses because of its location or struc-
ture. Water behind a dam, for instance, possesses energy 
because of its altitude above sea level. Molecules possess 
energy because of the arrangement of electrons in the bonds 
between their atoms. Chemical energy is a term used by 
biologists to refer to the potential energy available for release 
in a chemical reaction. Recall that catabolic pathways release 
energy by breaking down complex molecules. Biologists say 
that these complex molecules, such as glucose, are high in 
chemical energy. During a catabolic reaction, some bonds are 
broken and others are formed, releasing energy and resulting 
in lower-energy breakdown products. This transformation 
also occurs in the engine of a car when the hydrocarbons of 
gasoline react explosively with oxygen, releasing the energy 
that pushes the pistons and producing exhaust. Although less 
explosive, a similar reaction of food molecules with oxygen 
provides chemical energy in biological systems, producing 
carbon dioxide and water as waste products. Biochemical 
pathways, carried out in the context of cellular structures, 
enable cells to release chemical energy from food molecules 
and use the energy to power life processes.
How is energy converted from one form to another? 
Consider Figure 6.2. The woman climbing the ladder to the 
diving platform is releasing chemical energy from the food 
she ate for lunch and using some of that energy to perform 
An organism’s metabolism 
transforms matter and energy
The totality of an organism’s chemical reactions is called 
metabolism (from the Greek metabole, change). Metabolism 
is an emergent property of life that arises from orderly inter-
actions between molecules.
Metabolic Pathways
We can picture a cell’s metabolism as an elaborate road 
map of many chemical reactions, arranged as intersecting 
metabolic pathways. In a metabolic pathway, a specific 
molecule is altered in a series of defined steps, resulting in a 
certain product. Each step is catalyzed by a specific enzyme, 
a macromolecule that speeds up a chemical reaction:
CONCEPT 6.1
A B C D
Enzyme 1 Enzyme 2 Enzyme 3
Starting
molecule
Reaction 1 Reaction 2 Reaction 3
Product
The mechanisms that regulate these enzymes balance meta-
bolic supply and demand, just like traffic lights control the 
flow of traffic.
Metabolism as a whole manages the material and energy 
resources of the cell. Some metabolic pathways release 
energy by breaking down complex molecules to sim-
pler compounds. These degradative processes are called 
catabolic pathways, or breakdown pathways. One major 
catabolic pathway is cellular respiration, which breaks down 
glucose and other organic fuels in the presence of oxygen to 
carbon dioxide and water. (Pathways can have more than 
one starting molecule and/or product.) Energy stored in the 
organic molecules becomes available to do cellular work, 
such as ciliary beating or membrane transport. Anabolic 
pathways, in contrast, consume energy to build compli-
cated molecules from simpler ones; they are sometimes 
called biosynthetic pathways. Examples of anabolism are 
synthesis of an amino acid from simpler molecules and syn-
thesis of a protein from amino acids. Catabolic and anabolic 
pathways are the “downhill” and “uphill” avenues of the 
metabolic landscape. Energy released from downhill reac-
tions of catabolic pathways can be stored and then used to 
drive uphill reactions of anabolic pathways.
In this chapter, we will focus on mechanisms common to 
metabolic pathways. Because energy is fundamental to all 
metabolic processes, a basic knowledge of energy is neces-
sary to understand how the living cell works. Although we’ll 
look at some nonliving examples here to consider energetic 
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   142 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 144 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 143
derived from light energy absorbed by plants during photo-
synthesis. Organisms are energy transformers.
The Laws of Energy Transformation
The study of the energy transformations that occur in a col-
lection of matter is called thermodynamics. Scientists use 
the word system to denote the matter under study; they refer 
to the rest of the universe—everything outside the system—as 
the surroundings. An isolated system, such as that approximated 
by liquid in a thermos bottle, is unable to exchange either 
energy or matter with its surroundings outside the thermos. In 
an open system, energy and matter can be transferred between 
the system and its surroundings. Organisms are open systems. 
They absorb energy—for instance, light energy or chemical 
energy in the form of organic molecules—and release heat and 
metabolic waste products, such as carbon dioxide, to the sur-
roundings. Two laws of thermodynamics govern energy trans-
formations in organisms and all other collections of matter.
The First Law of Thermodynamics
According to the first law of thermodynamics, the 
energy of the universe is constant: Energy can be transferred 
and transformed, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The first 
law is also known as the principle of conservation of energy. The 
electric company does not make energy, but merely converts 
it to a form that is convenient for us to use. By converting 
sunlight to chemical energy, a plant acts as an energy trans-
former, not an energy producer.
The brown bear in Figure 6.3a will convert the chemical 
energy of the organic molecules in its food to kinetic and 
other forms of energy as it carries out biological processes. 
What happens to this energy after it has performed work? The 
second law of thermodynamics helps to answer this question.
the work of climbing. The kinetic energy of muscle move-
ment is thus being transformed into potential energy due to 
her increasing height above the water. The man diving is con-
verting his potential energy to kinetic energy, which is then 
transferred to the water as he enters it, resulting in splashing, 
noise, and increased movement of water molecules. A small 
amount of energy is lost as heat due to friction.
Now let’s consider the original source of the organic food 
molecules that provided the necessary chemical energy for 
these divers to climb the steps. This chemical energy was itself 
A diver has more potential
energy on the platform 
than in the water.
Climbing up converts the kinetic
energy of muscle movement
to potential energy.
A diver has less potential 
energy in the water
than on the platform.
Diving converts 
potential energy to 
kinetic energy.
. Figure 6.2 Transformations between potential energy 
and kinetic energy.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Energy Transformations
 Mastering Biology MP3 Tutor: Basic Energy Concepts
(a) 
Chemical
energy
in food
Kinetic
energy
Heat
+
CO2
H2O
First law of thermodynamics: Energy can be 
transferred or transformed but neither created nor 
destroyed. For example, chemical reactions in this 
brown bear will convert the chemical (potential) 
energy in the fish into the kinetic energy of running.
(b) Second law of thermodynamics: Every energy transfer or transformation increases 
the disorder (entropy) of the universe. For example, as the bear runs, disorder is 
increased around its body by the release of heat and small molecules that are the 
by-products of metabolism. A brown bear can run at speeds up to 35 miles per hour 
(56 km/hr) —as fast as a racehorse.
. Figure 6.3 The first two laws of thermodynamics.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   143 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 145 ===

144 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
spontaneous process. Note that as we’re using it here, 
the word spontaneous does not imply that the process would 
occur quickly; rather, the word signifies that it is energetically 
favorable. (In fact, it may be helpful for you to think of the 
phrase “energetically favorable” when you read the formal 
term spontaneous, the word preferred by chemists.) Some 
spontaneous processes, such as an explosion, may be virtually 
instantaneous, while others, such as the rusting of an old car 
over time, are much slower.
A process that, on its own, leads to a decrease in entropy 
is said to be nonspontaneous: It will happen only if energy is 
supplied. We know from experience that certain events occur 
spontaneously and others do not. For instance, we know that 
water flows downhill spontaneously but moves uphill only 
with an input of energy, such as when a machine pumps the 
water against gravity. Some of that energy is inevitably lost 
as heat, increasing entropy in the surroundings, so usage of 
energy during a nonspontaneous process also leads to an 
increase in the entropy of the universe as a whole.
Biological Order and Disorder
Living systems increase the entropy of their surroundings, 
as predicted by thermodynamic law. You may wonder, then, 
how cells create ordered structures from less organized start-
ing materials. For example, simpler molecules are ordered 
into the more complex structure of an amino acid, and amino 
acids are ordered into polypeptide chains. At the organismal 
level as well, complex and beautifully ordered structures 
result from biological processes that use simpler starting 
materials (Figure 6.4). How can this happen, if entropy must 
constantly increase?
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
If energy cannot be destroyed, why can’t organisms simply 
recycle their energy over and over again? It turns out that 
during every energy transfer or transformation, some energy 
is converted to thermal energy and released as heat, becom-
ing unavailable to do work. Only a small fraction of the 
chemical energy from the food in Figure 6.3a is transformed 
into the motion of the brown bear shown in Figure 6.3b; 
most is lost as heat, which dissipates rapidly through the 
surroundings.
A system can put thermal energy to work only when there 
is a temperature difference that results in thermal energy 
flowing as heat from a warmer location to a cooler one. If 
temperature is uniform, as it is in a living cell, then the heat 
generated during a chemical reaction will simply warm a 
body of matter, such as the organism. (This can make a room 
crowded with people uncomfortably warm, as each person is 
carrying out a multitude of chemical reactions!)
A consequence of the loss of usable energy as heat to the 
surroundings is that each energy transfer or transformation 
makes the universe more disordered. We are all familiar with 
the word “disorder” in the sense of a messy room or a run-
down building. The word “disorder” as used by scientists, 
however, has a specific molecular definition related to how 
dispersed the energy is in a system and how many different 
energy levels are present. For simplicity, we use “disorder” in 
the following discussion because our common understanding 
(the messy room) is a good analogy for molecular disorder.
Scientists use a quantity called entropy as a measure of 
molecular disorder, or randomness. The more randomly 
arranged a collection of matter is, the greater its entropy. 
We can now state the second law of thermodynamics: 
Every energy transfer or transformation increases the entropy of 
the universe. Although order can increase locally, there is an 
unstoppable trend toward randomization of the universe as 
a whole.
The physical disintegration of a system’s organized struc-
ture is a good analogy for an increase in entropy. For example, 
you can observe increasing entropy in the gradual decay of 
an unmaintained building over time. Much of the increasing 
entropy of the universe is more abstract, however, because it 
takes the form of increasing amounts of heat and less ordered 
forms of matter. As the bear in Figure 6.3b converts chemical 
energy to kinetic energy, it is also increasing the disorder of its 
surroundings by producing heat and small molecules, such as 
the CO2 it exhales, that are the breakdown products of food.
The concept of entropy helps us understand why certain 
processes are energetically favorable and occur on their 
own. It turns out that if a given process, by itself, leads to 
an increase in entropy, that process can proceed without 
requiring an input of energy. Such a process is called a 
 (a) Glass sponge (b) La Sagrada Família towers
5 cm
. Figure 6.4 Order as a characteristic of life. Order is evident in 
the detailed structures of (a) the Venus flower basket glass sponge, 
which inspired the Spanish architect Antoni Gaudi in his design of 
(b) the towers of La Sagrada Família church in Barcelona, Spain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   144 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 146 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 145
Free-Energy Change, DG
Recall that the universe is really equivalent to “the system” 
plus “the surroundings.” In 1878, J. Willard Gibbs, a profes-
sor at Yale, defined a very useful function called the Gibbs 
free energy of a system (without considering its surround-
ings), symbolized by the letter G. We’ll refer to the Gibbs free 
energy simply as free energy. Free energy is the portion of 
a system’s energy that can perform work when temperature 
and pressure are uniform throughout the system, as in a liv-
ing cell. Let’s consider how we determine the free-energy 
change that occurs when a system changes—for example, 
during a chemical reaction.
The change in free energy, !G, can be calculated for a 
chemical reaction by applying the following equation:
∆G=∆H-T∆S
This equation uses only properties of the system (the 
reaction) itself: DH symbolizes the change in the system’s 
enthalpy (in biological systems, equivalent to total energy); 
DS is the change in the system’s entropy; and T is the absolute 
temperature in Kelvin (K) units (K=°C+273; see the back 
of the book).
Using chemical methods, we can measure DG for any 
reaction. (The value will depend on conditions such as pH, 
temperature, and concentrations of reactants and prod-
ucts.) Once we know the value of DG for a process, we can 
use it to predict whether the process will be spontaneous 
(that is, whether it is energetically favorable and will occur 
without an input of energy). More than a century of experi-
ments has shown that only processes with a negative DG are 
spontaneous. For DG to be negative, DH must be negative 
(the system gives up enthalpy and H decreases) or TDS must 
be positive (the system gives up order and S increases), or 
both: When DH and TDS are tallied, DG has a negative value 
(∆G60) for all spontaneous processes. In other words, 
every spontaneous process decreases the system’s free 
energy, and processes that have a positive or zero DG are 
never spontaneous.
This information is immensely interesting to biologists, 
for it allows us to predict which kinds of change can happen 
without an input of energy. Such spontaneous changes can 
be harnessed by the cell to perform work. This principle is 
very important in the study of metabolism, where a major 
goal is to determine which reactions can supply energy for 
cellular work.
Free Energy, Stability, and Equilibrium
As we saw in the previous section, when a process occurs 
spontaneously in a system, we can be sure that DG is negative. 
Another way to think of DG is to realize that it represents the 
This increase in order is balanced by an organism’s taking in 
organized forms of matter and energy from the surroundings 
and replacing them with less ordered forms. For example, 
an animal obtains starch, proteins, and other complex 
molecules from the food it eats. As catabolic pathways break 
these molecules down, the animal releases CO2 and H2O
—small molecules that possess less chemical energy than the 
food did (see Figure 6.3b). The depletion of chemical energy 
is accounted for by heat generated during metabolism. On a 
larger scale, energy flows into most ecosystems in the form of 
light and exits in the form of heat (see Figure 1.9).
During the early history of life, complex organisms evolved 
from simpler ancestors. For instance, we can trace the ances-
try of the plant kingdom from much simpler organisms called 
green algae to more complex flowering plants. However, this 
increase in organization over time in no way violates the sec-
ond law. The entropy of a particular system, such as an organ-
ism, may actually decrease as long as the total entropy of the 
universe—the system plus its surroundings—increases. Thus, 
organisms are islands of low entropy in an increasingly ran-
dom universe. The evolution of biological order is perfectly 
consistent with the laws of thermodynamics.
CONCEPT CHECK 6.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS How does the second law of ther-
modynamics help explain the diffusion of a substance across 
a membrane? (See Figure 8.11.)
2. Describe the forms of energy found in an apple as it 
grows on a tree, then falls, then is digested by someone 
who eats it.
3. WHAT IF? If you place a teaspoon of sugar in the bottom  
of a glass of water, it will dissolve completely over time. Left 
longer, eventually the water will disappear and the sugar 
crystals will reappear. Explain these observations in terms 
of entropy.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 6.2
The free-energy change of 
a reaction tells us whether 
or not the reaction occurs 
spontaneously
The laws of thermodynamics that we’ve just explored apply 
to the universe as a whole. As biologists, we want to under-
stand the chemical reactions of life—for example, which 
reactions occur spontaneously and which ones require some 
input of energy from outside. But how can we know this with-
out assessing the energy and entropy changes in the entire 
universe for each separate reaction?
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   145 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 147 ===

146 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
possible value in that system. Free energy increases when a 
reaction is somehow pushed away from equilibrium, perhaps 
by removing some of the products (and thus changing their 
concentration relative to that of the reactants). We can think 
of the equilibrium state as a free-energy valley. Any change 
from the equilibrium position will have a positive DG and 
will not be spontaneous. For this reason, systems never spon-
taneously move away from equilibrium. Because a system at 
equilibrium cannot spontaneously change, it can do no work. 
A process is spontaneous and can perform work only when it is 
moving toward equilibrium.
Free Energy and Metabolism
We can now apply the free-energy concept more specifically 
to the chemistry of life’s processes.
Exergonic and Endergonic Reactions  
in Metabolism
Based on their free-energy changes, chemical reactions can 
be classified as either exergonic (“energy outward”) or end-
ergonic (“energy inward”). An exergonic reaction pro-
ceeds with a net release of free energy (Figure 6.6a). Because 
the chemical mixture loses free energy (G decreases), DG is 
negative for an exergonic reaction. Using DG as a standard 
for spontaneity, exergonic reactions are those that occur 
spontaneously. (Remember, the word spontaneous implies 
that it is energetically favorable, not that it will occur 
rapidly.) The magnitude of DG for an exergonic reaction 
difference between the free energy of the final state and the 
free energy of the initial state:
∆G=Gfinal state-Ginitial state
For a reaction to have a negative DG, the system must lose 
free energy during the change from initial state to final state. 
Because it has less free energy, the system in its final state is 
less likely to change and is therefore more stable than it was 
previously.
We can think of free energy as a measure of a system’s 
instability—its tendency to change to a more stable state. 
Unstable systems (higher G) tend to change in such a way 
that they become more stable (lower G). For example, a diver 
on top of a platform is less stable (more likely to fall) than 
when floating in the water; a drop of concentrated dye is less 
stable (more likely to disperse) than when the dye is spread 
randomly through the liquid; and a glucose molecule is less 
stable (more likely to break down) than the simpler molecules 
into which it can be split (Figure 6.5). Unless something 
prevents it, each of these systems will move toward greater 
stability: The diver falls, the solution becomes uniformly 
colored, and the glucose molecule is broken down into 
smaller molecules.
Another term that describes a state of maximum stability is 
equilibrium, which you learned about in Concept 2.4 in con-
nection with chemical reactions. At equilibrium, the forward 
and reverse reactions occur at the same rate, and there is no 
further net change in the relative concentration of products 
and reactants. For a system at equilibrium, G is at its lowest 
MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare the redistribution of molecules shown in (b) to the transport of hydrogen 
ions 1H+2 across a membrane by a proton pump, creating a concentration gradient (see Figure 8.18). Which 
process(es) result(s) in higher free energy? Which system(s) can do work?
(a)
In a spontaneous change
•
•
•
The free energy of the system
decreases (DG < 0).
The system becomes more stable.
The released free energy can
be harnessed to do work.
•
•
•
Less free energy (lower G)
More stable
Less work capacity
•
•
•
More free energy (higher G)
Less stable
Greater work capacity
Gravitational motion. Objects
move spontaneously from a
higher altitude to a lower one.
(b)Diffusion. Molecules in a drop
of dye diffuse until they are
randomly dispersed.
(c)Chemical reaction. In a cell, a
glucose molecule is broken down
into simpler molecules.
. Figure 6.5 The relationship of free energy to stability, work capacity, and spontaneous 
change. Unstable systems (top) are rich in free energy, G. They tend to change spontaneously to a 
more stable state (bottom). This “downhill” change can be harnessed to perform work.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   146 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 148 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 147
in a sense, the spent exhaust of a process that tapped the free 
energy stored in the bonds of the sugar molecules.
It is important to realize that the breaking of bonds does 
not release energy; on the contrary, as you will soon see, it 
requires energy. The phrase “energy stored in bonds” is short-
hand for the potential energy that can be released when new 
bonds are formed after the original bonds break, as long as 
the products are of lower free energy than the reactants.
An endergonic reaction is one that absorbs free 
energy from its surroundings (Figure 6.6b). Because 
this kind of reaction essentially stores free energy in 
molecules (G increases), DG is positive. Such reactions are 
non-spontaneous, and the magnitude of DG is the quantity 
of energy required to drive the reaction. If a chemical pro-
cess is exergonic (downhill), releasing energy in one direc-
tion, then the reverse process must be endergonic (uphill), 
using energy. A reversible process cannot be downhill in 
both directions. If ∆G=-686 kcal/mol for respiration, 
which converts glucose and oxygen to CO2 and H2O, then 
the reverse process—the conversion of CO2 and H2O to 
glucose and oxygen (O2)—must be strongly endergonic, 
with ∆G=+686 kcal/mol. Such a reaction would never 
happen by itself.
How, then, do plants make sugar? They get the required 
energy (686 kcal to make a mole of glucose) by capturing light 
from the sun and converting its energy to chemical energy. 
Next, in a long series of exergonic steps, they gradually spend 
that chemical energy to assemble glucose molecules.
Equilibrium and Metabolism
Reactions in an isolated system eventually reach equilib-
rium and can then do no work, as illustrated by the isolated 
hydroelectric system in Figure 6.7. The chemical reactions of 
metabolism are reversible, and they, too, would reach equi-
librium if they occurred in the isolation of a test tube. Because 
systems at equilibrium are at a minimum of G and can do no 
work, a cell that has reached metabolic equilibrium is dead! 
The fact that metabolism as a whole is never at equilibrium is one 
of the defining features of life.
represents the maximum amount of work the reaction can 
perform.* The greater the decrease in free energy, the greater 
the amount of work that can be done.
We can use the overall reaction for cellular respiration as 
an example:
C6H12O6+6 O2S6 CO2+6 H2O
∆G = -686 kcal/mol (-2,870 kJ/mol)
For each mole (180 g) of glucose broken down by respira-
tion under what are called “standard conditions” (1 M of 
each reactant and product, 25°C, pH 7), 686 kcal (2,870 kJ) 
of energy is made available for work. Because energy must be 
conserved, the chemical products of respiration store 686 kcal 
less free energy per mole than the reactants. The products are, 
* The word maximum qualifies this statement because some of the free energy 
is released as heat and cannot do work. Therefore, ∆G represents a theoretical 
upper limit of available energy.
Progress of the reaction
Progress of the reaction
Free energy
Reactants
Products
Amount of
energy
released
(DG , 0)
Amount of
energy
required
(DG . 0)
Energy
Energy
Products
Reactants
Free energy
(a) Exergonic reaction: energy released, spontaneous
(b) Endergonic reaction: energy required, nonspontaneous
. Figure 6.6 Free energy changes (DG) in exergonic and 
endergonic reactions.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Exergonic and Endergonic 
Reactions
DG , 0 DG 5 0
. Figure 6.7 Equilibrium and work in an isolated 
hydroelectric system. Water flowing downhill turns a turbine 
that drives a generator providing electricity to a lightbulb, but only 
until the system reaches equilibrium.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   147 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 149 ===

148 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Like most systems, a living cell is not in equilibrium. 
Materials flow in and out, keeping metabolic pathways from 
ever reaching equilibrium, and the cell continues to do work 
throughout its life. This principle is illustrated by the open 
(and more realistic) hydroelectric system in Figure 6.8a. 
However, unlike this simple single-step system, a catabolic 
pathway in a cell releases free energy in a series of reactions. 
An example is cellular respiration, illustrated by analogy in 
Figure 6.8b. Some of the reversible reactions of respiration 
are constantly “pulled” in one direction—that is, they are 
kept out of equilibrium. The key to maintaining this lack 
of equilibrium is that the product of a reaction does not 
accumulate but instead becomes a reactant in the next step; 
finally, waste products are expelled from the cell. The overall 
sequence of reactions is kept going by the huge free-energy 
difference between glucose and O2 at the top of the energy 
“hill” and CO2 and H2O at the “downhill” end. As long as our 
cells have a steady supply of glucose or other fuels and oxy-
gen and are able to expel waste products to the surroundings, 
their metabolic pathways never reach equilibrium and can 
continue to do the work of life.
Organisms are open systems. Sunlight provides a daily 
source of free energy for an ecosystem’s plants and other 
photosynthetic organisms. Animals and other nonphotosyn-
thetic organisms in an ecosystem must have a source of free 
DG , 0
DG , 0
DG , 0
DG , 0
(a) 
(b) A multistep open hydroelectric system. Cellular respiration
is analogous to this system: Glucose is broken down in a series
of exergonic reactions that power the work of the cell. The
product of each reaction is used as the reactant for the next,
so no reaction reaches equilibrium.
An open hydroelectric
system. Water flowing 
through a turbine keeps 
driving the generator 
because intake and
outflow of water keep 
the system from reaching
equilibrium.
. Figure 6.8 Equilibrium and work in open systems.
ATP powers cellular work by 
coupling exergonic reactions  
to endergonic reactions
A cell does three main kinds of work:
• Chemical work, the pushing of endergonic reactions 
that would not occur spontaneously, such as the syn-
thesis of polymers from monomers (chemical work 
will be discussed further here; examples are shown in 
Chapters 10 and 11)
• Transport work, the pumping of substances across mem-
branes against the direction of spontaneous movement 
(see Concept 8.4)
• Mechanical work, such as the beating of cilia (see 
Concept 7.6), the contraction of muscle cells, and the 
movement of chromosomes during cellular reproduction
A key feature in the way cells manage their energy 
resources to do this work is energy coupling, the use of an 
exergonic process to drive an endergonic one. ATP is respon-
sible for mediating most energy coupling in cells, and in most 
cases it acts as the immediate source of energy that powers 
cellular work.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Energy Coupling
The Structure and Hydrolysis of ATP
ATP (adenosine triphosphate; see Concept 4.3) contains 
the sugar ribose, with the nitrogenous base adenine and a 
chain of three phosphate groups (the triphosphate group) 
bonded to it (Figure 6.9a). In addition to its role in energy 
coupling, ATP is also one of the nucleoside triphosphates 
used to make RNA (see Figure 5.23).
CONCEPT 6.3
energy—the organic products of photosynthesis. Now we are 
ready to see how a cell actually performs the work of life.
CONCEPT CHECK 6.2
1. Cellular respiration uses glucose and O2, which have high 
levels of free energy, and releases CO2 and H2O, which have 
low levels of free energy. Is cellular respiration spontaneous 
or not? Is it exergonic or endergonic? What happens to the 
energy released from glucose?
2. VISUAL SKILLS How would the processes of catabolism 
and anabolism relate to Figure 6.5c?
3. WHAT IF? Some partygoers wear glow-in-the-dark necklaces 
that start glowing once they are “activated” by snapping the 
necklace. This allows two chemicals to react and emit light in  
the form of chemiluminescence. Is the reaction exergonic or 
endergonic? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   148 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 150 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 149
hydrolysis occurs under typical cellular conditions, the 
actual !G is about -13 kcal/mol, 78% greater than the energy 
released by ATP hydrolysis under standard conditions.
Because their hydrolysis releases energy, the phosphate 
bonds of ATP are sometimes referred to as high-energy 
phosphate bonds, but the term is misleading. The phos-
phate bonds of ATP are not unusually strong bonds, as 
“high-energy” may imply; rather, the reactants (ATP and 
water) themselves have high energy relative to the energy of 
the products (ADP and  P i). The release of energy during the 
hydrolysis of ATP comes from the chemical change of the 
system to a state of lower free energy, not from the phosphate 
bonds themselves.
ATP is useful to the cell because the energy it releases 
on losing a phosphate group is somewhat greater than the 
energy most other molecules could deliver. But why does 
this hydrolysis release so much energy? If we reexamine the 
ATP molecule in Figure 6.9a, we can see that all three phos-
phate groups are negatively charged. These like charges are 
crowded together, and their mutual repulsion contributes 
to the instability of this region of the ATP molecule. The 
triphosphate tail of ATP is the chemical equivalent of a com-
pressed spring.
How ATP Provides Energy  
That Performs Work
When ATP is hydrolyzed in a test tube, the release of free 
energy merely heats the surrounding water. In an organism, 
this same generation of heat can sometimes be beneficial. 
For instance, the process of shivering uses ATP hydrolysis 
during muscle contraction to warm the body. In most cases 
in the cell, however, the generation of heat alone would 
be an inefficient (and potentially dangerous) use of a valu-
able energy resource. Instead, the cell’s proteins harness the 
energy released during ATP hydrolysis in several ways to 
perform the three types of cellular work—chemical, trans-
port, and mechanical.
For example, with the help of specific enzymes, the cell 
is able to use the high free energy of ATP to drive chemi-
cal reactions that, by themselves, are endergonic. If the 
DG of an endergonic reaction is less than the amount of 
energy released by ATP hydrolysis, then the two reactions 
can be coupled so that, overall, the coupled reactions are 
exergonic. This usually involves phosphorylation, the 
transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to some other 
molecule, such as the reactant. The recipient molecule 
with the phosphate group covalently bonded to it is then 
called a phosphorylated intermediate. The key to 
coupling exergonic and endergonic reactions is the forma-
tion of this phosphorylated intermediate, which is more  Mastering Biology Animation: The Structure of ATP  
Animation: Space-Filling Model of ATP  
Animation: Stick Model of ATP
Energy
(a)The structure of ATP. In the cell, most hydroxyl groups of 
phosphates are ionized (—O– ).
(b)The hydrolysis of ATP. The reaction of ATP and water yields  
inorganic phosphate (     ) and ADP and releases energy.
Triphosphate group 
(3 phosphate groups)
O– O– O–
O
OOO
P–OO P P O
Ribose
Adenine
CH2
HC
HH
HH
OH OH
O
NH2
N
N
C
N
C
C
N
CH
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
Inorganic 
phosphate
+ +
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
H2O
Pi
Pi
PP
PPP
. Figure 6.9 The structure and hydrolysis of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). Throughout this book, the chemical structure 
of the triphosphate group seen in (a) will be represented by the 
three joined yellow circles shown in (b).
The bonds between the phosphate groups of ATP can be 
broken by hydrolysis. When the terminal phosphate bond 
is broken by addition of a water molecule, a molecule of 
inorganic phosphate (HOPO2-
3, abbreviated as  P i throughout 
this book) leaves the ATP, which becomes adenosine diphos-
phate, or ADP (Figure 6.9b). The reaction is exergonic and 
releases 7.3 kcal of energy per mole of ATP hydrolyzed:
ATP+H2OSADP+ P i
∆G = -7.3 kcal/mol (- 30.5 kJ/mol)
This is the free-energy change measured under standard 
conditions. In the cell, conditions do not conform to stan-
dard conditions, primarily because reactant and product 
concentrations differ from 1 M. For example, when ATP 
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   149 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 151 ===

150 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
P
P
Pi
Pi1
2
+
Glutamic acid Ammonia
DGGlu = 13.4 kcal/mol
DGGlu = 13.4 kcal/mol
DGGlu = 13.4 kcal/mol
DGATP = –7.3 kcal/mol+
Net  DG = –3.9 kcal/mol
DGATP = –7.3 kcal/mol
+  ADP +  ADP +ATP
ATP
Glu
Glu
Glu
Glu
Glutamine
++
Glu
NH2
Glu
NH2
Glu
NH2
+
Glutamic acid Phosphorylated
intermediate
Glutamine
+  ADP +
1 2
(a)Glutamic acid conversion to glutamine. 
Glutamine synthesis from glutamic acid 
(Glu) by itself is endergonic (DG is positive), 
so it is not spontaneous.
(b)
(c)Free-energy change for coupled 
reaction. DG for the glutamic acid 
conversion to glutamine (+3.4 kcal/mol) 
plus DG for ATP hydrolysis (–7.3 kcal/mol) 
gives the free-energy change for the 
overall reaction (–3.9 kcal/mol). Because 
the overall process is exergonic (net DG is 
negative), it occurs spontaneously.
NH3
NH3
NH3
Conversion reaction coupled with ATP 
hydrolysis. In the cell, glutamine synthesis  
occurs in two steps, coupled by a phosphorylated 
intermediate (Glu-     ).       ATP phosphorylates 
glutamic acid, making it less stable, with more 
free energy.       Ammonia displaces the 
phosphate group, forming glutamine.
. Figure 6.10 How ATP drives chemical work: energy coupling using ATP hydrolysis.  
In this example, the exergonic process of ATP hydrolysis drives an endergonic process—synthesis  
of the amino acid glutamine.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Referring to Figure 5.14, explain why glutamine (Gln) is drawn in 
this figure as a glutamic acid (Glu) with an amino group attached.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
reactive (less stable, with more free energy) than the original 
unphosphorylated molecule (Figure 6.10).
Transport and mechanical work in the cell are also nearly 
always powered by the hydrolysis of ATP. In these cases, ATP 
hydrolysis leads to a change in a protein’s shape and often 
its ability to bind another molecule. Sometimes this occurs 
via a phosphorylated intermediate, as seen for the transport 
protein in Figure 6.11a. In most instances of mechanical 
work involving motor proteins “walking” along cytoskeletal 
elements (Figure 6.11b), a cycle occurs in which ATP is first 
bound noncovalently to the motor protein. Next, ATP is 
hydrolyzed, releasing ADP and  P i. Another ATP molecule can 
then bind. At each stage, the motor protein changes its shape 
and ability to bind the cytoskeleton, resulting in movement 
of the protein along the cytoskeletal track. Phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation promote crucial protein shape 
changes during many other important cellular processes as 
well.
 Motor protein
ATP
Transport protein Solute
Vesicle
Cytoskeletal track
Solute transported 
Pi
ADP +ATP PiADP +Pi
P
(a)Transport work: ATP phosphorylates transport proteins, causing 
a shape change that allows transport of solutes.
(b)Mechanical work: ATP binds noncovalently to motor proteins 
and then is hydrolyzed, causing a shape change that walks the 
motor protein forward.
Protein and vesicle moved
ATP
. Figure 6.11 How ATP drives transport and mechanical work. ATP hydrolysis causes changes 
in the shapes and binding affinities of proteins. This can occur either (a) directly, by phosphorylation, 
as shown for a membrane protein carrying out active transport of a solute (see also Figure 8.16 and 
the proton pump in Figure 7.32, upper left), or (b) indirectly, via noncovalent binding of ATP and its 
hydrolytic products, as is the case for motor proteins that move vesicles (and other organelles) along 
cytoskeletal “tracks” in the cell (see also Figures 7.21 and 7.32, lower right).
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   150 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 152 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 151
The Regeneration of ATP
An organism at work uses ATP continuously, but ATP is a 
renewable resource that can be regenerated by the addition 
of phosphate to ADP (Figure 6.12). The free energy required 
to phosphorylate ADP comes from exergonic breakdown 
reactions (catabolism) in the cell. This shuttling of inorganic 
phosphate and energy is called the ATP cycle, and it couples 
the cell’s energy-yielding (exergonic) processes to the energy-
consuming (endergonic) ones. The ATP cycle proceeds at an 
astonishing pace. For example, a working muscle cell recycles 
its entire pool of ATP in less than a minute. That turnover 
represents 10 million molecules of ATP consumed and regen-
erated per second per cell. If ATP could not be regenerated by 
the phosphorylation of ADP, humans would use up nearly 
their body weight in ATP each day.
Because both directions of a reversible process cannot 
be downhill, the regeneration of ATP from ADP and  P i is 
necessarily endergonic:
ADP+ P iSATP+H2O
∆G = + 7.3 kcal/mol (+ 30.5 kJ/mol) (standard conditions)
Since ATP formation from ADP and  P i is not spontane-
ous, free energy must be spent to make it occur. Catabolic 
(exergonic) pathways, especially cellular respiration, provide 
the energy for the endergonic process of making ATP. Plants 
also use light energy to produce ATP. Thus, the ATP cycle is a 
key player in bioenergetics, functioning as a revolving door 
through which energy passes during its transfer from cata-
bolic to anabolic pathways.
ATP synthesis 
from ADP +      
requires energy. 
ATP hydrolysis
to ADP +        
yields energy. 
Energy for cellular 
work (endergonic,
energy-consuming 
processes)
Energy from
catabolism (exergonic,
energy-releasing
processes)
ADP +
ATP+H2O PiPi
Pi
. Figure 6.12 The ATP cycle. Energy released by breakdown 
reactions (catabolism) in the cell is used to phosphorylate ADP, 
regenerating ATP. Chemical potential energy stored in ATP drives 
most cellular work.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Metabolism Overview
CONCEPT CHECK 6.3
1. How does ATP typically transfer energy from an exergonic 
to an endergonic reaction in the cell?
2. Which combination has more free energy: glutamic acid +  
ammonia + ATP or glutamine + ADP + ○P 
 i? Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Does Figure 6.11a show passive or 
active transport? Explain. (See Concepts 8.3 and 8.4.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 6.4
Enzymes speed up metabolic 
reactions by lowering energy 
barriers
The laws of thermodynamics tell us what will and will not 
happen under given conditions but say nothing about the 
rate of these processes. A spontaneous chemical reaction 
occurs without any requirement for outside energy, but it may 
occur so slowly that it is imperceptible. For example, even 
though the hydrolysis of sucrose (table sugar) to glucose and 
fructose is exergonic, occurring spontaneously with a release 
of free energy (∆G = -7 kcal/mol), a solution of sucrose dis-
solved in sterile water will sit for years at room temperature 
with no appreciable hydrolysis. However, if we add a small 
amount of the enzyme sucrase to the solution, then all the 
sucrose may be hydrolyzed within seconds, as shown here:
+ +
Sucrose
(C12H22O11)
Glucose
(C6H12O6 )
Fructose
(C6H12O6 )
O H2O
OH HO
Sucrase
How does the enzyme do this? An enzyme is a macromol-
ecule that acts as a catalyst, a chemical agent that speeds up 
a reaction without being consumed by the reaction. In this 
chapter, we focus on enzymes that are proteins. (Some RNA 
molecules, called ribozymes, can function as enzymes; these 
will be discussed in Concepts 17.3 and 25.1.) Without regula-
tion by enzymes, chemical traffic through the pathways of 
metabolism would become terribly congested because many 
chemical reactions would take such a long time. In the next 
two sections, we will see why spontaneous reactions can be 
slow and how an enzyme changes the situation.
The Activation Energy Barrier
Every chemical reaction between molecules involves both 
bond breaking and bond forming. For example, the hydro-
lysis of sucrose involves breaking the bond between glucose 
and fructose and one of the bonds of a water molecule and 
then forming two new bonds, as shown above. Changing one 
molecule into another generally involves contorting the start-
ing molecule into a highly unstable state before the reaction 
can proceed. This contortion can be compared to the bending 
of a metal key ring when you pry it open to add a new key. 
The key ring is highly unstable in its opened form but returns 
to a stable state once the key is threaded all the way onto the 
ring. To reach the contorted state where bonds can change, 
reactant molecules must absorb energy from their surround-
ings. When the new bonds of the product molecules form, 
energy is released as heat, and the molecules return to stable 
shapes with lower energy than the contorted state.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   151 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 153 ===

152 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
the reactant molecules is increasing. At the summit, when 
energy equivalent to EA has been absorbed, the reactants are 
in the transition state: They are activated, and their bonds 
can be broken. As the atoms then settle into their new, more 
stable bonding arrangements, energy is released to the sur-
roundings. This corresponds to the downhill part of the 
curve, which shows the loss of free energy by the molecules. 
The overall decrease in free energy means that EA is repaid 
with dividends, as the formation of new bonds releases more 
energy than was invested in the breaking of old bonds.
The reaction shown in Figure 6.13 is exergonic and occurs 
spontaneously (∆G60). However, the activation energy pro-
vides a barrier that determines the rate of the reaction. The reac-
tants must absorb enough energy to reach the top of the acti-
vation energy barrier before the reaction can occur. For some 
reactions, EA is modest enough that even at room temperature 
there is sufficient thermal energy for many of the reactant mol-
ecules to reach the transition state in a short time. In most cases, 
however, EA is so high and the transition state is reached so 
rarely that the reaction will hardly proceed at all. In these cases, 
the reaction will occur at a noticeable rate only if energy is pro-
vided, usually by heat. For example, the reaction of gasoline and 
oxygen is exergonic and will occur spontaneously, but energy 
is required for the molecules to reach the transition state and 
react. Only when the spark plugs fire in an automobile engine 
can there be the explosive release of energy that pushes the pis-
tons. Without a spark, a mixture of gasoline hydrocarbons and 
oxygen will not react because the EA barrier is too high.
How Enzymes Speed Up Reactions
Proteins, DNA, and other complex cellular molecules are 
rich in free energy and have the potential to decompose 
spontaneously; that is, the laws of thermodynamics favor 
their breakdown. These molecules only persist because at 
temperatures typical for cells, few molecules can make it over 
the hump of activation energy. The barriers for selected reac-
tions must occasionally be surmounted, however, for cells to 
carry out the processes needed for life. Heat can increase the 
rate of a reaction by allowing reactants to attain the transition 
state more often, but this would not work well in biologi-
cal systems. First, high temperature denatures proteins and 
kills cells. Second, heat would speed up all reactions, not just 
those that are needed. Instead of heat, organisms carry out 
catalysis, the process by which a catalyst selectively speeds 
up a reaction without itself being consumed. (You learned 
about catalysts earlier in this section.)
An enzyme catalyzes a reaction by lowering the EA bar-
rier (Figure 6.14), enabling the reactant molecules to absorb 
enough energy to reach the transition state even at moder-
ate temperatures, as we’ll see shortly. It is crucial to note 
that an enzyme cannot change the ∆G for a reaction; it cannot 
make an endergonic reaction exergonic. Enzymes can only 
The initial investment of energy for starting a reaction—
the energy required to contort the reactant molecules so the 
bonds can break—is known as the free energy of activation, or 
activation energy, abbreviated EA in this book. We can 
think of activation energy as the amount of energy needed to 
push the reactants to the top of an energy barrier, or “uphill,” 
so that the “downhill” part of the reaction can begin. 
Activation energy is often supplied by heat in the form of 
thermal energy that the reactant molecules absorb from the 
surroundings. The absorption of thermal energy accelerates 
the reactant molecules, so they collide more often and more 
forcefully. It also agitates the atoms within the molecules, 
making the breakage of bonds more likely. When the mol-
ecules have absorbed enough energy for the bonds to break, 
the reactants are in an unstable condition known as the 
transition state.
Figure 6.13 graphs the energy changes for a hypotheti-
cal exergonic reaction that swaps portions of two reactant 
molecules:
AB+CDSAC+B
 Reactants     Products
The activation of the reactants is represented by the uphill 
portion of the graph, in which the free-energy content of 
DRAW IT Graph the progress of an endergonic reaction in which EF 
and GH form products EG and FH, assuming that the reactants must pass 
through a transition state.
AB
CD
AB
CD
A
C
B
D
Transition state
The reactants AB and CD must absorb
enough energy from the surroundings
to reach the unstable transition state,
where bonds can break.
After bonds have 
broken, new bonds 
form, releasing energy 
to the surroundings.
Reactants
Products
Progress of the reaction
Free energy
DG < 0
EA
. Figure 6.13 Energy profile of an exergonic reaction.  
The “molecules” are hypothetical, with A, B, C, and D representing 
portions of the molecules. Thermodynamically, this is an 
exergonic reaction, with a negative DG, and the reaction occurs 
spontaneously. However, the activation energy (EA) provides a 
barrier that determines the rate of the reaction.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   152 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 154 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 153
 Mastering Biology Animation: How Enzymes Work
hasten reactions that would eventually occur anyway, but 
this enables the cell to have a dynamic metabolism, rout-
ing chemicals smoothly through metabolic pathways. Also, 
enzymes are very specific for the reactions they catalyze, so 
they determine which chemical processes will be going on in 
the cell at any given time.
Substrate Specificity of Enzymes
The reactant an enzyme acts on is referred to as the enzyme’s 
substrate. The enzyme binds to its substrate (or substrates, 
when there are two or more reactants), forming an enzyme-
substrate complex. While enzyme and substrate are joined, 
the catalytic action of the enzyme converts the substrate to 
Free energy
Progress of the reaction
Reactants
Products
DG is unaffected
by enzyme
EA
without 
enzyme
Course of
reaction
without
enzyme EA with 
enzyme
is lower
Course of
reaction
with enzyme
. Figure 6.14 The effect of an enzyme on activation energy. 
Without affecting the free-energy change (!G) for a reaction, an 
enzyme speeds the reaction by reducing its activation energy (EA).
Substrate
Active site
Enzyme-substrate
complex
Enzyme
(a) In this space-filling model of 
the enzyme hexokinase (blue), the 
active site forms a groove on the 
surface. The enzyme’s substrate is 
glucose (red).
(b) When the substrate enters the active site, it forms 
weak bonds with the enzyme, inducing a change in 
the shape of the protein. This change allows additional 
weak bonds to form, causing the active site to enfold 
the substrate and hold it in place.
. Figure 6.15 Induced fit between an enzyme and its substrate.
the product (or products) of the reaction. The overall process 
can be summarized as follows:
Enzyme+ Enzyme@ Enzyme+
Substrate(s) L substrate L Product(s)
complex
Most enzyme names end in -ase. (See if you can find three 
examples of enzymes in the lower left of Figure 7.32.) For 
example, the enzyme sucrase catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
the disaccharide sucrose into its two monosaccharides, 
glucose and fructose (see the diagram at the beginning of 
Concept 6.4):
Sucrase+ Sucrase@ Sucrase+
Sucrose+ L sucrose@H2O L Glucose+
H2O complex Fructose
The reaction catalyzed by each enzyme is very specific; an 
enzyme can recognize its specific substrate even among 
closely related compounds. For instance, sucrase will act only 
on sucrose and will not bind to other disaccharides, such 
as maltose. What accounts for this molecular recognition? 
Recall that most enzymes are proteins, and that proteins 
are macromolecules with unique 3-D configurations. The 
specificity of an enzyme results from its shape, which is a 
 consequence of its amino acid sequence.
Only a restricted region of the enzyme molecule actually 
binds to the substrate. This region, called the active site, is 
typically a pocket or groove on the surface of the enzyme where 
catalysis occurs (Figure 6.15a; see also Figure 5.16). Usually, the 
active site is formed by only a few of the enzyme’s amino acids, 
with the rest of the protein molecule providing a framework 
that determines the shape of the active site. The specificity of 
an enzyme is attributed to a complementary fit between the 
shape of its active site and the shape of the substrate.
An enzyme is not a stiff structure 
locked into a given shape. In fact, 
recent work by biochemists has shown 
that enzymes (and other proteins) 
seem to “dance” between subtly differ-
ent shapes in a dynamic equilibrium, 
with slight differences in free energy 
for each “pose.” The shape that best 
fits the substrate isn’t necessarily the 
one with the lowest energy, but during 
the very short time the enzyme takes 
on this shape, its active site can bind 
to the substrate. The active site itself is 
also not a rigid receptacle for the sub-
strate. As shown in Figure 6.15b, when 
the substrate enters the active site, the 
enzyme changes shape slightly due to 
interactions between the substrate’s 
chemical groups and chemical groups 
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   153 3/14/20   1:48 AM

=== SIDE 155 ===

154 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
on the side chains of the amino acids that form the active site. 
This shape change makes the active site fit even more snugly 
around the substrate. The tightening of the binding after ini-
tial contact—called induced fit—is like a clasping handshake. 
Induced fit brings chemical groups of the active site into posi-
tions that enhance their ability to catalyze the chemical reaction.
Catalysis in the Enzyme’s Active Site
In most enzymatic reactions, the substrate is held in the 
active site by so-called weak interactions, such as hydrogen 
bonds and ionic bonds. The R groups of a few of the amino 
acids that make up the active site catalyze the conversion 
of substrate to product, and the product departs from the 
active site. The enzyme is then free to take another sub-
strate molecule into its active site. The entire cycle hap-
pens so fast that a single enzyme molecule typically acts 
on about 1,000 substrate molecules per second, and some 
enzymes are even faster. Enzymes, like other catalysts, 
emerge from the reaction in their original form. Therefore, 
very small amounts of enzyme can have a huge metabolic 
impact by functioning over and over again in catalytic 
cycles. Figure 6.16 shows a catalytic cycle involving two 
substrates and two products.
Most metabolic reactions are reversible, and an enzyme 
can catalyze either the forward or the reverse reaction, 
depending on which direction has a negative ∆G. This in turn 
depends mainly on the relative concentrations of reactants 
and products. The net effect is always in the direction of 
equilibrium.
Enzymes use a variety of mechanisms that lower activation 
energy and speed up a reaction (see Figure 6.16, step 3 ):
• In reactions involving two or more reactants, the active 
site provides a template on which the substrates can 
come together in the proper orientation for a reaction to 
occur between them.
• As the active site of an enzyme clutches the bound sub-
strates, the enzyme may stretch the substrate molecules 
toward their transition state form, stressing and bending 
critical chemical bonds to be broken during the reaction. 
Because EA is proportional to the difficulty of breaking 
the bonds, distorting the substrate helps it approach the 
transition state and thus reduces the amount of free en-
ergy that must be absorbed to achieve that state.
• The active site may also provide a microenvironment 
that is more conducive to a certain reaction than the so-
lution itself would be without the enzyme. For example, 
if the active site has amino acids with acidic R groups, it 
may provide a pocket of low pH in an otherwise neutral 
cell. Here, an acidic amino acid may facilitate H+ transfer 
to the substrate as a key step in catalyzing the reaction.
• Amino acids in the active site may directly participate in 
the chemical reaction. Sometimes this process involves 
VISUAL SKILLS The enzyme-substrate complex passes through a 
transition state (see Figure 6.13). Label the part of the cycle where the 
transition state occurs.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Enzymes: Steps in a Reaction
Enzyme-substrate
complex
Enzyme
Products
 4   Products are
released.
5
Active
site is
avail-
able for
two new
substrate
molecules.
 
6
Substrates
2
     Substrates are
converted to
products.
4
     Substrates are held
in the active site by 
weak interactions, such 
as hydrogen bonds and 
ionic bonds.
3     The active 
site lowers 
EA and 
speeds up 
the reaction 
(see text).
1     Substrates enter the  
active site; enzyme changes 
shape such that its active 
site enfolds the substrates 
(induced fit).
. Figure 6.16 The active site and catalytic cycle of an enzyme. 
An enzyme can convert one or more reactant molecules to one or more 
product molecules. The enzyme shown here converts two substrate 
molecules to two product molecules.
brief covalent bonding between the substrate and the 
side chain of an amino acid of the enzyme. Subsequent 
steps restore the side chains to their original states so 
that the active site is the same after the reaction as it 
was before.
The rate at which a particular amount of enzyme converts 
substrate to product is partly a function of the initial concen-
tration of the substrate: The more substrate molecules that 
are available, the more frequently they access the active sites 
of the enzyme molecules. However, there is a limit to how 
fast the reaction can be pushed by adding more substrate to 
a fixed concentration of enzyme. At some point, the con-
centration of substrate will be high enough that all enzyme 
molecules will have their active sites engaged. As soon as 
the product exits an active site, another substrate molecule 
enters. At this substrate concentration, the enzyme is said to 
be saturated, and the rate of the reaction is determined by the 
speed at which the active site converts substrate to product. 
When an enzyme population is saturated, the only way to 
increase the rate of product formation is to add more enzyme. 
Cells often increase the rate of a reaction by producing more 
enzyme molecules. You can graph the overall progress of an 
enzymatic reaction in the Scientific Skills Exercise.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   154 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 156 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 155
Making a Line Graph and Calculating 
a Slope
Does the Rate of Glucose 6-Phosphatase Activity Change 
over Time in Isolated Liver Cells? Glucose 6-phosphatase, 
which is found in mammalian liver cells, is a key enzyme in con-
trol of blood glucose level. The enzyme catalyzes the breakdown 
of glucose 6-phosphate into glucose and inorganic phosphate 
(~P i). These products are transported out of liver cells into the 
blood, increasing the blood glucose level. In this exercise, you 
will graph data from a time-course experiment that measured ~P i 
concentration in the buffer outside isolated liver cells, thus indi-
rectly measuring glucose 6-phosphatase activity inside the cells.
How the Experiment Was Done Isolated rat liver cells were 
placed in a dish with buffer at physiological conditions (pH 7.4, 
37°C). Glucose 6-phosphate (the substrate) was added so it could 
be taken up by cells and broken down by glucose 6-phosphatase. 
A sample of buffer was removed every 5 minutes and the con-
centration of ~P i that had been transported out of the cells was 
determined.
Data from the Experiment
Time (min) Concentration of ~P i (µmol/mL)
 0   0
 5  10
10  90
15 180
20 270
25 330
30 355
35 355
40 355
Data from S. R. Commerford et al., Diets enriched in sucrose or fat increase glu-
coneogenesis and G-6-Pase but not basal glucose production in rats, American 
Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism 283:E545–E555 (2002).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. To see patterns in the data from a time-course experiment 
like this, it is helpful to graph the data. First, determine which 
set of data goes on each axis. (a) What did the researchers 
intentionally vary in the experiment? This is the independent 
variable, which goes on the x-axis. (b) What are the units (ab-
breviated) for the independent variable? Explain in words 
what the abbreviation stands for. (c) What was measured by 
the researchers? This is the dependent variable, which goes 
on the y-axis. (d) What does the units abbreviation stand for? 
Label each axis, including the units.
2. Next, mark off the axes with just enough evenly spaced tick 
marks to accommodate the full set of data. Determine the span 
of data values for each axis. (a) What is the largest value to go on 
the x-axis? What is a reasonable spacing for the tick marks, and 
what should be the highest one? (b) What is the largest value to 
go on the y-axis? What is a reasonable spacing for the tick marks, 
and what should be the highest one?
3. Plot the data points on your graph. Match each x-value with its 
partner y-value and place a point on the graph at that coordinate. 
Draw a line that connects the points. (For additional information 
about graphs, see the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
4. Examine your graph and look for patterns in the data. (a) Does 
the concentration of ~P i increase evenly throughout the course 
of the experiment? To answer this question, describe the pat-
tern you see in the graph. (b) What part of the graph shows the 
highest rate of enzyme activity? Consider that the rate of enzyme 
activity is related to the slope of the line, ∆y>∆x (the “rise” over 
the “run”), in µmol/(mL#min), with the steepest slope indicat-
ing the highest rate of enzyme activity. Calculate the rate of 
enzyme activity (slope) where the 
graph is steepest. (c) Can you think 
of a biological explanation for the 
pattern you see?
5. If your blood glucose level is low 
from skipping lunch, what reaction 
(discussed in this exercise) will occur 
in your liver cells? Write out the re-
action and put the name of the en-
zyme over the reaction arrow. How 
will this reaction affect your blood 
glucose level?
 Instructors:  A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Effects of Local Conditions on Enzyme Activity
The activity of an enzyme—how efficiently the enzyme 
functions—is affected by general environmental factors, such 
as temperature and pH. It can also be affected by chemicals 
that specifically influence that enzyme. In fact, researchers 
have learned much about enzyme function by employing 
such chemicals.
Effects of Temperature and pH
The 3-D structures of proteins are sensitive to their environ-
ment (see Figure 5.20). As a consequence, each enzyme works 
better under some conditions than others, because these 
optimal conditions favor the most active shape for the enzyme.
Temperature and pH are environmental factors impor-
tant in the activity of an enzyme. Up to a point, the rate of 
an enzymatic reaction increases with increasing tempera-
ture, partly because substrates collide with active sites more 
frequently when the molecules move rapidly. Above that 
temperature, however, the speed of the enzymatic reaction 
drops sharply. The thermal agitation of the enzyme molecule 
disrupts the hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, and other weak 
interactions that stabilize the active shape of the enzyme, and 
the protein molecule eventually denatures. Each enzyme has 
an optimal temperature at which its reaction rate is greatest. 
Without denaturing the enzyme, this temperature allows the 
greatest number of molecular collisions and the fastest con-
version of the reactants to product molecules. Most human 
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   155 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 157 ===

156 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Just as each enzyme has an optimal temperature, it also has 
a pH at which it is most active. The optimal pH values for most 
enzymes fall in the range of pH 6–8, but there are exceptions. 
For example, pepsin, a digestive enzyme in the human stomach, 
works best at a very low pH. Such an acidic environment dena-
tures most enzymes, but pepsin is well-adapted evolutionarily 
to maintain its functional 3-D structure in the acidic environ-
ment of the stomach. In contrast, trypsin, a digestive enzyme 
residing in the more alkaline environment of the human intes-
tine would be denatured in the stomach (Figure 6.17b).
Cofactors
Many enzymes require nonprotein helpers for catalytic activ-
ity, often for chemical processes like electron transfers that 
cannot easily be carried out by the amino acids in proteins. 
These adjuncts, called cofactors, may be bound tightly to 
the enzyme as permanent residents, or they may bind loosely 
and reversibly along with the substrate. The cofactors of some 
enzymes are inorganic, such as the metal atoms zinc, iron, 
and copper in ionic form. If the cofactor is an organic mol-
ecule, it is referred to, more specifically, as a coenzyme. Most 
vitamins are important in nutrition because they act as coen-
zymes or raw materials from which coenzymes are made.
Enzyme Inhibitors
Certain chemicals selectively inhibit the action of specific 
enzymes. Sometimes the inhibitor attaches to the enzyme by 
covalent bonds, in which case the inhibition is usually irrevers-
ible. Many enzyme inhibitors, however, bind to the enzyme 
by weak interactions, and when this occurs the inhibition is 
reversible. Some reversible inhibitors resemble the normal 
substrate molecule and compete for admission into the active 
site (Figure 6.18a and b). These mimics, called competitive 
inhibitors, reduce the productivity of enzymes by blocking 
substrates from entering active sites. This kind of inhibition can 
be overcome by increasing the concentration of substrate so 
that as active sites become available, more substrate molecules 
than inhibitor molecules are around to gain entry to the sites.
In contrast, noncompetitive inhibitors do not directly 
compete with the substrate to bind to the enzyme at the 
active site (Figure 6.18c). Instead, they impede enzymatic 
reactions by binding to another part of the enzyme. This 
interaction causes the enzyme molecule to change its shape 
in such a way that the active site becomes much less effective 
at catalyzing the conversion of substrate to product.
Toxins and poisons are often irreversible enzyme inhibi-
tors. An example is sarin, a nerve gas. In 2017, sarin was used 
in a chemical attack in Syria, killing about 100 people and 
injuring hundreds more. This small molecule binds covalently 
to the R group on the amino acid serine, which is found in 
the active site of acetylcholinesterase, an enzyme important 
in the nervous system. Other examples include the pesticides 
DDT and parathion, inhibitors of key enzymes in the nervous 
system. Finally, many antibiotics are inhibitors of specific 
enzymes have optimal temperatures of about 35 –40°C (close 
to human body temperature). The thermophilic bacteria that 
live in hot springs contain enzymes with optimal tempera-
tures of 70°C or higher (Figure 6.17a).
INTERPRET THE DATA Looking at the graph in (b), what is the 
optimal pH for pepsin activity? Explain why natural selection might 
have resulted in the optimal pH for pepsin, a stomach enzyme (see 
Figure 3.11). What is the optimal pH for trypsin?
pH
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
20 40 60 80 100 120
(a)
Temperature (°C)
Pepsin (stomach
enzyme)
Trypsin (intestinal
enzyme)
Optimal temperature for
typical human enzyme (37°C)
Optimal temperature for
enzyme of thermophilic 
                (heat-loving)
                bacteria (75°C)
0Rate of reaction Rate of reaction
The photo shows thermophilic cyanobacteria (green) thriving in 
the hot water of a Nevada geyser. The graph compares the 
optimal temperatures for an enzyme from the thermophilic 
bacterium Thermus oshimai (75°C) and human enzymes (37°C, 
body temperature).  
(b)This graph shows the rate of reaction for two digestive 
enzymes over a range of pH values.
. Figure 6.17 Environmental factors affecting enzyme 
activity. Each enzyme has an optimal (a) temperature and (b) pH 
that favor the most active shape of the protein molecule.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   156 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 158 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 157
 Mastering Biology Animation: Enzymes: Competitive 
Inhibition • Animation: Enzymes: Noncompetitive Inhibition
(a) Normal binding
(b) Competitive inhibition
(c) Noncompetitive inhibition
Substrate
Active site
Enzyme
Competitive
inhibitor
Noncompetitive inhibitor
A substrate can
bind normally to the
active site of an
enzyme.
A competitive
inhibitor mimics the
substrate, competing
for the active site.
A noncompetitive inhibitor binds 
to the enzyme away from the 
active site, altering the shape of 
the enzyme so that even though 
the substrate can still bind, the 
active site functions much less 
effectively, if at all.
. Figure 6.18 Inhibition of enzyme activity.
enzymes in bacteria. For instance, penicillin blocks the active 
site of an enzyme that many bacteria use to make cell walls.
Citing enzyme inhibitors that are metabolic poisons may 
give the impression that enzyme inhibition is generally 
abnormal and harmful. In fact, molecules naturally present in 
the cell often regulate enzyme activity by acting as inhibitors. 
Such regulation—selective inhibition—is essential to the con-
trol of cellular metabolism, as you’ll see in Concept 6.5.
The Evolution of Enzymes
EVOLUTION Thus far, biochemists have identified more than 
4,000 different enzymes in various species, most likely a very 
small fraction of all enzymes. How did this grand profusion 
of enzymes arise? Recall that most enzymes are proteins, and 
proteins are encoded by genes. A permanent change in a gene, 
known as a mutation, can result in a protein with one or more 
changed amino acids. In the case of an enzyme, if the changed 
amino acids are in the active site or some other crucial region, 
the altered enzyme might have a novel activity or might bind 
to a different substrate. Under environmental conditions where 
the new function benefits the organism, natural selection would 
tend to favor the mutated form of the gene, causing it to persist 
in the population. This simplified model is generally accepted as 
the main way in which the multitude of different enzymes arose 
over the past few billion years of life’s history. Data supporting 
this model have been collected by researchers using a lab proce-
dure that mimics evolution in natural populations (Figure 6.19).
CONCEPT CHECK 6.4
1. Many spontaneous reactions occur very slowly. Why don’t 
all spontaneous reactions occur instantly?
2. Say you are using a Bunsen burner in the lab. Why doesn’t the 
flame creep back into the gas line and set the gas supply on fire?
3. WHAT IF? Malonate is an inhibitor of the enzyme succinate 
dehydrogenase. How would you determine whether malo-
nate is a competitive or noncompetitive inhibitor?
4. DRAW IT A mature lysosome has an internal pH of around 
4.5. Using Figure 6.17b as a guide, draw a graph showing 
what you would predict for the rate of reaction for a lyso-
somal enzyme. Label its optimal pH, assuming its optimal pH 
matches its environment.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 6.5
Regulation of enzyme activity 
helps control metabolism
Chemical chaos would result if all of a cell’s metabolic path-
ways were operating simultaneously. Intrinsic to life’s pro-
cesses is a cell’s ability to tightly regulate its metabolic path-
ways by controlling when and where its various enzymes are 
active. It does this either by switching on and off the genes 
that encode specific enzymes (which will be discussed in 
Two changed amino acids were
found near the active site. Active site
Two changed amino acids 
were found in the active site.
Two changed amino acids 
were found on the surface.
. Figure 6.19 Mimicking evolution of an enzyme with a new 
function. Researchers tested whether the function of an enzyme 
called b-galactosidase, which breaks down the sugar lactose, could 
change over time in populations of the bacterium Escherichia coli. After 
seven rounds of mutation and selection in the lab, b-galactosidase 
evolved into an enzyme specialized for breaking down a sugar other 
than lactose. This ribbon model shows one subunit of the altered 
enzyme; six amino acids (blue dots) were different.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   157 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 159 ===

158 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
Called cooperativity, this mechanism amplifies the 
response of enzymes to substrates: One substrate molecule 
primes an enzyme to act on additional substrate molecules 
more readily. Cooperativity is considered allosteric regulation 
because even though substrate is binding to an active site, its 
binding affects catalysis in another active site.
Although hemoglobin is not an enzyme (it carries O2 rather 
than catalyzing a reaction), classic studies of hemoglobin 
Concepts 18.1 and 18.2) or, as discussed here, by regulating 
the activity of enzymes once they are made.
Allosteric Regulation of Enzymes
In many cases, the molecules that naturally regulate enzyme 
activity in a cell behave something like reversible noncompeti-
tive inhibitors (see Figure 6.18c): These regulatory molecules 
change an enzyme’s shape and the functioning of its active site 
by binding to a site elsewhere on the molecule, via noncovalent 
interactions. Allosteric regulation is the term used to describe 
any case in which a protein’s function at one site is affected by 
the binding of a regulatory molecule to a separate site. It may 
result in either inhibition or stimulation of an enzyme’s activity.
Allosteric Activation and Inhibition
Most enzymes known to be allosterically regulated are con-
structed from two or more subunits, each composed of a 
polypeptide chain with its own active site. The entire complex 
oscillates between two different shapes, one catalytically active 
and the other inactive (Figure 6.20a). In the simplest kind of 
allosteric regulation, an activating or inhibiting regulatory 
molecule binds to a regulatory site (sometimes called an alloste-
ric site), often located where subunits join. The binding of an 
activator to a regulatory site stabilizes the shape that has func-
tional active sites, whereas the binding of an inhibitor stabilizes 
the inactive form of the enzyme. The subunits of an allosteric 
enzyme fit together in such a way that a shape change in one 
subunit is transmitted to all others. Through this interaction of 
subunits, a single activator or inhibitor molecule that binds to 
one regulatory site will affect the active sites of all subunits.
Fluctuating concentrations of regulators can cause a sophis-
ticated pattern of response in the activity of cellular enzymes. 
The products of ATP hydrolysis (ADP and  P i), for example, play 
a complex role in balancing the flow of traffic between anabolic 
and catabolic pathways by their effects on key enzymes. ATP 
binds to several catabolic enzymes allosterically, lowering their 
affinity for substrate and thus inhibiting their activity. ADP, 
however, functions as an activator of the same enzymes. This 
is logical because catabolism functions in regenerating ATP. If 
ATP production lags behind its use, ADP accumulates and acti-
vates the enzymes that speed up catabolism, producing more 
ATP. If the supply of ATP exceeds demand, then catabolism 
slows down as ATP molecules accumulate and bind to the same 
enzymes, inhibiting them. (You’ll see specific examples of this 
type of regulation when you learn about cellular respiration 
in Chapter 10; see, for example, Figure 10.19.) ATP, ADP, and 
other related molecules also affect key enzymes in anabolic 
pathways. In this way, allosteric enzymes control the rates of 
important reactions in both sorts of metabolic pathways.
In another kind of allosteric activation, a substrate 
molecule binding to one active site in a multisubunit enzyme 
triggers a shape change in all the subunits, thereby increas-
ing catalytic activity at the other active sites (Figure 6.20b). 
Allosteric enzyme
with four subunits
Substrate
Active form Stabilized
active form
Inactive form
Inactive form
Stabilized 
inactive form
Stabilized active form
Regulatory
site (one
of four) Activator
Inhibitor
Substrate
Active site (one of four)
Non-
functional
active site
Oscillation
Allosteric activator
stabilizes active form.
Binding of one substrate molecule to
active site of one subunit locks all
subunits in active conformation.
Allosteric inhibitor
stabilizes inactive form.
(a) Allosteric activators and inhibitors
(b) Cooperativity: another type of allosteric activation
At low concentrations, activators and inhibitors dissociate from the 
enzyme. The enzyme can then oscillate again.
The inactive form shown on the left oscillates with the active form 
when the active form is not stabilized by substrate.
. Figure 6.20 Allosteric regulation of enzyme activity.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   158 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 160 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 159
In this chapter, you have learned about the laws of ther-
modynamics that govern metabolism, the intersecting set of 
chemical pathways characteristic of life. We have explored 
the bioenergetics of breaking down and building up biologi-
cal molecules. To continue the theme of energy flow, and spe-
cifically of bioenergetics, we will next examine the structure 
of eukaryotic cells in detail, focusing on the various organ-
elles in which specific chemical reactions take place.
have elucidated the principle of cooperativity. Hemoglobin 
is made up of four subunits, each with an O2-binding site (see 
Figure 5.18). The binding of an O2 to one binding site increases 
the affinity for O2 of the remaining binding sites. Thus, where 
O2 is at a high level, such as in the lungs or gills, hemoglobin’s 
affinity for O2 increases as more binding sites are filled. In  
O2-deprived tissues, however, the release of each O2 molecule 
decreases the O2 affinity of the other binding sites, resulting in 
the release of O2 where it is most needed. Cooperativity works 
similarly in multisubunit enzymes that have been studied.
Feedback Inhibition
Earlier, we looked at the allosteric inhibition of an enzyme in 
an ATP-generating pathway by ATP itself. This is a common 
mode of metabolic control, called feedback inhibition, in 
which a metabolic pathway is halted by the inhibitory bind-
ing of its end product to an enzyme that acts early in the path-
way. Figure 6.21 shows an example of feedback inhibition 
operating on an anabolic pathway. Some cells use this five-
step pathway to synthesize the amino acid isoleucine from 
threonine, another amino acid. As isoleucine accumulates, it 
slows down its own synthesis by allosterically inhibiting the 
enzyme for the first step of the pathway. Feedback inhibition 
thereby prevents the cell from making more isoleucine than is 
necessary and thus wasting chemical resources.
Active site
available;
pathway
can proceed
Isoleucine
used up by
cell
Isoleucine
binds to
allosteric
site.
Initial 
substrate
(threonine)
Threonine
in active site
Enzyme 1
(threonine
deaminase)
Active site 
of enzyme 1
is no longer
able to cata-
lyze the
conversion
of threonine
to interme-
diate A;
pathway is
halted.
End product
(isoleucine)
Intermediate A
Intermediate B
Enzyme 2
Intermediate C
Enzyme 3
Enzyme 4
Intermediate D
Enzyme 5
Feedback
inhibition
. Figure 6.21 Feedback inhibition in isoleucine synthesis.
Mitochondrion
0.5 om
The matrix contains enzymes in 
solution that are involved in the 
second stage of cellular respiration. 
Enzymes for the third stage 
of cellular respiration 
are embedded in the 
inner membrane.
. Figure 6.22 Organelles and structural order in metabolism. 
Organelles such as the mitochondrion (TEM) contain enzymes that 
carry out specific functions, in this case the second and third stages 
of cellular respiration. (See also Figure 7.32b, lower left.)
CONCEPT CHECK 6.5
1. How do an activator and an inhibitor have different effects 
on an allosterically regulated enzyme?
2. WHAT IF? Regulation of isoleucine synthesis is an example 
of feedback inhibition of an anabolic pathway. With that in 
mind, explain how ATP might be involved in feedback inhibi-
tion of a catabolic pathway.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Localization of Enzymes Within the Cell
The cell is not just a bag of chemicals with thousands of differ-
ent kinds of enzymes and substrates in a random mix. The cell 
is compartmentalized, and cellular structures help bring order 
to metabolic pathways. In some cases, a team of enzymes for 
several steps of a metabolic pathway are assembled into a mul-
tienzyme complex. The arrangement facilitates the sequence 
of reactions, with the product from the first enzyme becom-
ing the substrate for an adjacent enzyme in the complex, and 
so on, until the end product is released. Some enzymes and 
enzyme complexes have fixed locations within the cell and act 
as structural components of particular membranes. Others are 
in solution within particular membrane-enclosed eukaryotic 
organelles, each with its own internal chemical environment. 
For example, in eukaryotic cells, the enzymes for the second 
and third stages of cellular respiration reside in specific loca-
tions within mitochondria (Figure 6.22; see also Figure 7.32b).
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   159 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 161 ===

160 UNIT ONE  The Role of Chemistry in Biology
phosphorylation) also causes changes in the shape and binding 
affinities of transport and motor proteins.
• Catabolic pathways drive regeneration of ATP from ADP +○P 
  i.
? Describe the ATP cycle: How is ATP used and regenerated in a cell?
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
 G o  t o  Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
CONCEPT 6.1
An organism’s metabolism transforms matter  
and energy (pp. 142–145)
• Metabolism is the collection of chemical reactions that occur 
in an organism. Enzymes catalyze reactions in intersecting 
metabolic pathways, which may be catabolic (breaking 
down molecules, releasing energy) or anabolic (building mole-
cules, consuming energy). Bioenergetics is the study of the flow 
of energy through living organisms.
• Energy is the capacity to cause change; some forms of energy 
do work by moving matter. Kinetic energy is associated with 
motion and includes thermal energy associated with random 
motion of atoms or molecules. Heat is thermal energy in transfer 
from one object to another. Potential energy is related to the 
location or structure of matter and includes chemical energy 
possessed by a molecule due to its structure.
• The first law of thermodynamics, conservation of energy, 
states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, only transferred 
or transformed. The second law of thermodynamics states 
that spontaneous processes, those requiring no outside input 
of energy, increase the entropy (molecular disorder) of the 
universe.
? Explain how the highly ordered structure of a cell does not conflict 
with the second law of thermodynamics.
CONCEPT 6.2
The free-energy change of a reaction tells us whether 
or not the reaction occurs spontaneously (pp. 145–148)
• A living system’s free energy is energy that can do work under 
cellular conditions. The change in free energy (DG) during a bio-
logical process is related directly to enthalpy change (DH) and to 
the change in entropy (DS): ∆G=∆H - T∆S. Organisms live at 
the expense of free energy. A spontaneous process occurs with no 
energy input; during such a process, free energy decreases and the 
stability of a system increases. At maximum stability, the system is 
at equilibrium and can do no work.
• In an exergonic (spontaneous) chemical reaction, the products 
have less free energy than the reactants 1-∆G2. Endergonic 
(nonspontaneous) reactions require an input of energy 1+∆G2.  
The addition of starting materials and the removal of end prod-
ucts prevent metabolism from reaching equilibrium.
? Explain the meaning of each component in the equation for the 
change in free energy of a spontaneous chemical reaction. Why are 
spontaneous reactions important in the metabolism of a cell?
CONCEPT 6.3
ATP powers cellular work by coupling exergonic 
reactions to endergonic reactions (pp. 148–151)
• ATP is the cell’s energy shuttle. Hydrolysis of its terminal phos-
phate yields ADP and ○P 
  i and releases free energy.
• Through energy coupling, the exergonic process of ATP hydro-
lysis drives endergonic reactions by transfer of a phosphate group 
to specific reactants, forming a phosphorylated intermediate 
that is more reactive. ATP hydrolysis (sometimes with protein 
CONCEPT 6.4
Enzymes speed up metabolic reactions by lowering 
energy barriers (pp. 151–157)
• In a chemical reaction, the energy necessary to break the bonds of 
the reactants is the activation energy, EA.
• Enzymes lower the EA barrier:
Free energy
Progress of the reaction
Reactants
Products
DG is unaffected
by enzyme
EA
without 
enzyme
Course of
reaction
without
enzyme EA with 
enzyme
is lower
Course of
reaction
with enzyme
• Each enzyme has a unique active site that binds one or more 
substrate(s), the reactants on which it acts. It then changes 
shape, binding the substrate(s) more tightly (induced fit).
• The active site can lower an EA barrier by orienting substrates cor-
rectly, straining their bonds, providing a favorable microenviron-
ment, or even covalently bonding with the substrate.
• Each enzyme has an optimal temperature and pH.
• Inhibitors reduce enzyme function. A competitive inhibitor 
binds to the active site, whereas a noncompetitive inhibitor 
binds to a different site on the enzyme.
• Natural selection, acting on organisms with variant enzymes, is 
responsible for the diversity of enzymes found in organisms.
? How do both activation energy barriers and enzymes help maintain 
the structural and metabolic order of life?
CONCEPT 6.5
Regulation of enzyme activity helps control 
metabolism (pp. 157–159)
• Many enzymes are subject to allosteric regulation: Regulatory 
molecules, either activators or inhibitors, bind to specific regu-
latory sites, affecting the shape and function of the enzyme. 
In cooperativity, binding of one substrate molecule can 
stimulate binding or activity at other active sites. In feedback 
inhibition, the end product of a metabolic pathway allosteri-
cally inhibits the enzyme for a previous step in the pathway.
• Some enzymes are grouped into complexes, some are incorpo-
rated into membranes, and some are contained inside organelles, 
increasing the efficiency of metabolic processes.
? What roles do allosteric regulation and feedback inhibition play in 
the metabolism of a cell?
6 Chapter Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   160 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 162 ===

 CHAPTER 6  Energy and Life 161
11. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Explain what is happening in this photo in terms of kinetic 
energy and potential energy. Include the energy conversions 
that occur when the penguins eat fish and climb back up 
on the glacier. Describe the role of ATP and enzymes in the 
underlying molecular processes, including what happens to the 
free energy of some of the molecules involved.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
8. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Some people argue that 
biochemical pathways are too complex to have evolved because 
all intermediate steps in a given pathway must be present to 
produce the final product. Critique this argument. How could 
you use the diversity of metabolic pathways that produce the 
same or similar products to support your case?
9. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT A researcher has developed 
an assay to measure the activity of an important enzyme present 
in pancreatic cells growing in culture. She adds the enzyme’s 
substrate to a dish of cells and then measures the appearance 
of reaction products. The results are graphed as the amount of 
product on the y-axis versus time on the x-axis. The researcher 
notes four sections of the graph. For a short period of time, 
no products appear (section A). Then (section B) the reaction 
rate is quite high (the slope of the line is steep). Next, the 
reaction gradually slows down (section C). Finally, the graph 
line becomes flat (section D). Draw and label the graph, and 
propose a model to explain the molecular events occurring at 
each stage of this reaction profile.
10. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ENERGY AND MATTER The laws 
of thermodynamics explain the relationship between energy 
and matter. In a short essay (100–150 words), describe how 
the first and second laws of thermodynamics form the basis of 
energy transformations in organisms.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C06_PRF.indd   161 3/14/20   1:49 AM

=== SIDE 163 ===

Dr. Diana Bautista is an Associate Professor of 
Molecular and Cell Biology at the University of 
California, Berkeley, and a Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute Faculty Scholar. Recipient of the Gill 
Transformative Investigator Award and the Society 
for Neuroscience Young Investigator Award, she re-
ceived a B.S. in Biology from the University of Oregon 
and a Ph.D. in Neuroscience from Stanford University. 
Dr. Bautista grew up in Chicago, the first in her family 
to attend college and to pursue a career in science. 
She and her laboratory members investigate the cell-
signaling pathways associated with pain and itch and 
how their misregulation can result in chronic pain 
and chronic itch. Her research is interdisciplinary:  
Dr. Bautista collaborates with computational biolo-
gists, immunologists, and physiologists. She believes 
that science benefits most from a diverse group of 
colleagues, each bringing a different perspective.
CELL BIOLOGYUnit 2 
What got you interested in biology, 
and in neuroscience in particular?
I always liked science as a kid, but it was 
never a big focus in my life. I went to col-
lege interested in art, then took some 
time off because I was a terrible artist. I 
ended up working with an environmental 
group helping low-income communities 
oppose a hazardous waste incinerator. 
That got me excited about science be-
cause it was at the interface of the envi-
ronment and community empowerment, 
so I decided to return to college and major 
in biology. Once I returned to school, at 
the University of Oregon, I found out 
you could get a work-study job in a lab. 
I ended up working in Peter O’Day’s lab 
studying vision in fruit flies by recording 
electrical signals in response to light. For 
me, shining light on a fly eye and record-
ing an electrical signal from their nervous 
system in real time was just the coolest 
thing I had ever seen. The lab was a really 
inclusive, warm environment, and Peter 
was an amazing mentor—if it weren’t for 
him, I wouldn’t be in science. I went to 
graduate school at Stanford in neurosci-
ence, where I worked with Dr. Richard 
Lewis on a newly discovered calcium chan-
nel and how calcium signaling pathways 
drive cellular behaviors.
Why did you focus your  
research on pain?
After my Ph.D., I wanted to continue work-
ing on cell signaling but from a more 
organismal viewpoint, so I did my post-
doctoral research with Dr. David Julius at 
the University of California, San Francisco. 
His lab had recently identified the cel-
lular protein (TRPV1) that is responsive to 
 capsaicin—the molecule that gives chili 
peppers their “hotness”—and showed that 
this protein is also activated by painful heat. 
That was really exciting to me because it 
involved thinking about proteins involved 
in cell signaling, but in the bigger context 
of pain. Proteins like TRPV1 serve important 
protective  functions—for example, by stop-
ping us from grabbing a hot frying pan that 
could cause a burn. One of my projects was 
to identify the wasabi receptor, a protein 
on the surface of nerve cells that plays a key 
role in inflamma-
tory pain hyper-
sensitivity. Once 
you activate 
this receptor 
protein—with 
irritants such as 
wasabi, mustard 
oil, or inflamma-
tory mediators produced in the body by 
tissue injury such as a burn—it activates and 
makes pain cells more sensitive: Warmth 
triggers sensations of burning heat, and 
light touch triggers pain. Normally, pain 
hypersensitivity dies down after a few days 
as the tissue heals, but in some patients, it 
becomes a chronic debilitating disease.
What does your lab work on now?
We are interested in the sense of touch. 
Touch-sensitive neurons innervate the 
skin and mediate gentle touch sensa-
tions and texture preferences: Do you like 
wool sweaters, or do you find them itchy? 
Touch-sensitive neurons also innervate 
our musculature, allowing us to detect 
limb position and mediating coordinated 
movements, such as our ability to text or 
to walk in a straight line without staring 
at our feet. In someone suffering from 
chronic pain, a gentle touch feels incred-
ibly painful, while a chronic itch sufferer 
experiences light touch as itchy and pain 
as pleasure. When you scratch an itch, 
you’re scratching really hard—if you didn’t 
have an itch it would hurt, but when you 
do have an itch it feels good. We have no 
idea how our body processes the same 
type of stimulus under different injury or 
disease conditions, and that’s what really 
excited me when I started my own lab.
What is your advice to an 
undergraduate considering  
a career in biology?
I’m an advisor for undergraduates, so I talk 
to a lot of students. I like to tell them about 
my path and let them know that it doesn’t 
matter what you did 
before or where you 
come from—anybody 
can be a scientist.  
I think it’s sometimes 
tough early on in biol-
ogy, because at first 
you’re taught facts, 
but as you progress,  
biology is about figuring out the unknown. 
And if you can get into a lab early on, then 
you really see that side of science—that it’s 
about learning what we know, and then 
going beyond that, doing experiments to 
identify new mechanisms.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Diana M. Bautista
. Dr. Bautista studies cell responses to 
stimuli using equipment that measures 
electrical signals.
"It doesn’t matter what you 
did before or where you 
come from—anybody can 
be a scientist."
URRY1637_12_GE_U02_PRF.indd   162 3/14/20   2:40 AM

=== SIDE 164 ===

163
Figure 7.1 The cell is an organism’s basic unit of structure and function. Many 
forms of life exist as single-celled organisms, such as the Paramecium shown here. 
Larger, more complex organisms, including plants and animals, are multicellular. 
In this chapter, we focus mainly on eukaryotic cells—cells with a nucleus.
Cell Structure and Function7
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 7
• Figure 7.7 Walkthrough: Geometric 
Relationships between Surface Area and 
Volume
• BioFlix® Animations: Tour of an Animal Cell 
and Tour of a Plant Cell
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Tour of an Animal Cell: The 
Endomembrane System
• Tutorial: Tour of a Plant Cell: Structures 
and Functions
7.1 Biologists use microscopes and 
biochemistry to study cells p. 164
7.2 Eukaryotic cells have internal 
membranes that compartmentalize 
their functions p. 167
7.3 The eukaryotic cell’s genetic 
instructions are housed in the nucleus 
and carried out by the ribosomes p. 172
7.4 The endomembrane system 
regulates protein traffic and 
performs metabolic functions p. 174
7.5 Mitochondria and chloroplasts change 
energy from one form to another p. 179
7.6 The cytoskeleton is a network of 
fibers that organizes structures and 
activities in the cell p. 182
7.7 Extracellular components and 
connections between cells help 
coordinate cellular activities p. 188
7.8 A cell is greater than the sum of its 
parts p. 191
KEY CONCEPTS
The plasma membrane 
controls what goes into 
and out of the cell.
Plant cells have a 
protective cell wall.
Chloroplasts convert 
light energy to 
chemical energy.
Mitochondria break 
down molecules, 
generating ATP.
A system of internal 
membranes 
synthesizes and 
OodiƂes proteins, 
lipids, and 
carbohydrates.
DNA in the nucleus 
contains instructions 
for making proteins.
Ribosomes are the 
sites of protein 
synthesis.
Interactions with
the environment
Genetic
information
storage and
transmission
Energy and matter
transformations
How does the internal organization of eukaryotic cells
allow them to perform the functions of life?
Internal membranes divide a cell, such as this plant cell, into 
coOpartOents where speciƂc cheOical reactions occur
Ribosome
Protein
Study Tip
Draw animal and plant cells: Draw an 
outline of an animal cell and add structures, 
labels, and functions. Draw a plant cell 
labeled with structures unique to plant cells.
Plasma membrane: 
a selective barrier
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   163 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 165 ===

164 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
10 om
0.1 nm
1 nm
10 nm
100 nm
1 om
100 om
1 mm
1 cm
0.1 m
1 m
10 m
Human height
Length of some
nerve and 
muscle cells
Chicken egg
Frog egg
Super-
resolution
microscopy
Most plant and
animal cells
Human egg
Most bacteria
Mitochondrion
Viruses
Smallest bacteria
Ribosomes
Proteins
Lipids
Small molecules
Atoms
1 centimeter (cm) = 10–2 meter (m) = 0.4 inch
1 millimeter (mm) = 10–3 m
1 micrometer (om) = 10–3 mm = 10–6 m
1 nanometer (nm) = 10–3 om = 10–9 m
Nucleus
Unaided eye
Light microscopy
Electron microscopy
. Figure 7.2 The size range of cells. Most cells are between 1 and 
100 µm in diameter (yellow region of chart), and their components 
are even smaller (see Figure 7.32), as are viruses. Notice that the scale 
along the left side is logarithmic, to accommodate the range of sizes 
shown. Starting at the top of the scale with 10 m and going down, each 
reference measurement marks a tenfold decrease in diameter or length. 
For a complete table of the metric system, see the back of the book.
have much shorter wavelengths than visible light. Modern 
electron microscopes can theoretically achieve a resolution of 
about 0.002 nm, though in practice they usually cannot resolve 
structures smaller than about 2 nm across. Still, this is a 100-fold 
improvement over the standard light microscope.
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) is especially 
useful for detailed study of the topography of a specimen (see 
Figure 7.3). The electron beam scans the surface of the sample, 
usually coated with a thin film of gold. The beam excites 
Biologists use microscopes and 
biochemistry to study cells
How can cell biologists investigate the inner workings of a cell, 
usually too small to be seen by the unaided eye? Before we tour 
the cell, it will be helpful to learn how cells are studied.
Microscopy
The development of instruments that extend the human 
senses allowed the discovery and early study of cells. 
Microscopes were invented in 1590 and further refined dur-
ing the 1600s. Cell walls were first seen on dead cells of oak 
bark by Robert Hooke in 1665 and living cells by Antoni van 
Leeuwenhoek a few years later.
The microscopes first used by Renaissance scientists, as 
well as the microscopes you are likely to use in the laboratory, 
are all light microscopes. In a light microscope (LM), vis-
ible light is passed through the specimen and then through 
glass lenses. The lenses refract (bend) the light in such a way 
that the image of the specimen is magnified as it is projected 
into the eye or into a camera (see Appendix C).
Three important parameters in microscopy are magnifica-
tion, resolution, and contrast. Magnification is the ratio of 
an object’s image size to its real size. Light microscopes can 
magnify effectively to about 1,000 times the actual size of 
the specimen; at greater magnifications, additional details 
cannot be seen clearly. Resolution is a measure of the clarity 
of the image; it is the minimum distance two points can be 
separated and still be distinguished as separate points. For 
example, what appears to the unaided eye as one star in the 
sky may be resolved as twin stars with a telescope, which has 
a higher resolving ability than the eye. Similarly, using stan-
dard techniques, the light microscope cannot resolve detail 
finer than about 0.2 micrometer (µm), or 200 nanometers 
(nm), regardless of the magnification (Figure 7.2). The third 
parameter, contrast, is the difference in brightness between 
the light and dark areas of an image. Methods for enhanc-
ing contrast include staining or labeling cell components to 
stand out visually. Figure 7.3 shows some different types of 
microscopy; study this figure as you read this section.
Until recently, the resolution barrier prevented cell biolo-
gists from using standard light microscopy when studying 
organelles, the membrane-enclosed structures within eukar-
yotic cells. To see these structures in any detail required the 
development of a new instrument. In the 1950s, the electron 
microscope was introduced to biology. Rather than focusing 
light, the electron microscope (EM) focuses a beam of elec-
trons through the specimen or onto its surface (see Appendix C). 
Resolution is inversely related to the wavelength of the light (or 
electrons) a microscope uses for imaging, and electron beams 
CONCEPT 7.1
 Mastering Biology Animation: Metric System Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   164 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 166 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 165
. Figure 7.3  Exploring Microscopy
Brightfield. Light passes directly 
through the specimen. Unstained 
(left), the image has little contrast. 
Staining with dyes (right) enhances 
contrast. Most stains require cells to 
be preserved, which kills them.
Phase-contrast. Variations in 
density within the specimen are 
amplified to enhance contrast in 
unstained cells; this is especially 
useful for examining living, 
unstained cells.                          
Differential interference 
contrast (Nomarski). As in 
phase-contrast microscopy, optical 
modifications are used to exagger-
ate differences in density; the 
image appears almost 3-D.           
Fluorescence. Locations of specific molecules 
are revealed by labeling the molecules with 
fluorescent dyes or antibodies, which absorb 
ultraviolet radiation and emit visible light. In this 
fluorescently labeled uterine cell, DNA is blue, 
organelles called mitochondria are orange, and 
part of the cell’s “skeleton” (called the 
cytoskeleton) is green.
50 om
10 om10 om
10 om
50 om
Confocal. This image shows two types 
of fluorescence micrographs: confocal 
(top) and standard (bottom). (Nerve cells 
are green, support cells orange, areas of 
overlap yellow.)  In confocal microscopy, 
a laser is used to create a single plane of 
fluorescence; out-of-focus light from 
other planes is eliminated. By capturing 
sharp images at many different planes, a 3-D reconstruction can 
be created. A standard fluorescence micrograph is blurry because 
out-of-focus light is not excluded.
Deconvolution. The top of this image 
of a white blood cell was reconstructed 
from many blurry fluorescence 
images at different planes, each 
processed using deconvolution 
software. This process digitally removes 
out-of-focus light and reassigns it to its 
source, creating a much sharper 3-D 
image. The bottom is a compilation of 
standard fluorescent micrographs 
through the same cell.
Super-resolution. To make this super-
resolution image of a cow aorta cell (top), 
individual fluorescent molecules were 
excited by UV light and their position 
recorded. (DNA is blue, mitochondria 
red, and part of the cytoskeleton green.) 
Combining information from many 
molecules in different places ”breaks” 
the resolution limit, resulting in the sharp 
image on top. The size of each dot is well 
below the 200-nm resolution of a standard light microscope, as 
seen in the confocal image (bottom) of the same cell.
Abbreviations used in figure legends in this text: 
LM 5 Light Micrograph 
SEM 5 Scanning Electron Micrograph 
TEM 5 Transmission Electron Micrograph  
Electron Microscopy (EM)
Scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM). Micrographs taken with a 
scanning electron microscope 
show a 3-D image of the surface 
of a specimen. This SEM shows 
the surface of a cell from a trachea 
(windpipe) covered with cell 
projections called cilia. Electron 
micrographs are black and 
white but are often artificially 
colorized to highlight particular 
structures, as has been done with 
all three electron micrographs 
shown here.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A transmission electron 
microscope profiles a thin section of a specimen. This TEM shows a section 
through a tracheal cell, revealing its internal structure. In preparing the 
specimen, some cilia were cut along their lengths, creating longitudinal 
sections, while other cilia were cut straight across, creating cross sections.
Light Microscopy (LM)
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). 
Specimens of tissue or aqueous 
solutions of proteins are frozen rapidly 
at temperatures less than –160°C, 
locking the molecules into a rigid state. 
A beam of electrons is passed through 
the sample to visualize the molecules 
by electron microscopy, and software is 
used to merge a series of such micro-
graphs, creating a 3-D image like the 
one below. 
Human
cheek
cells
Cilia
Longitudinal
section of cilium
Cross section
of cilium
TEM
SEM
2 om
2 om
Computer-generated image of the 
bacterial enzyme d-galactosidase, which 
breaks down lactose. This image was 
compiled from more than 90,000 
cryo-EM images. 
VISUAL SKILLS When the tissue was sliced, what was 
the orientation of the cilia in the lower portion of the 
TEM? The upper portion? Explain how the orientation of 
the cilia determined the type of sections we see.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   165 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 167 ===

166 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
electrons on the surface, and these secondary electrons are 
detected by a device that translates the pattern of electrons into 
an electronic signal sent to a video screen. The result is an image 
of the specimen’s surface that appears three-dimensional.
The transmission electron microscope (TEM) is used 
to study the internal structure of cells (see Figure 7.3). The 
TEM aims an electron beam through a very thin section of the 
specimen, much as a light microscope aims light through a 
sample on a slide. For the TEM, the specimen has been stained 
with atoms of heavy metals, which attach to certain cellular 
structures, thus enhancing the electron density of some parts 
of the cell more than others. The electrons passing through 
the specimen are scattered more in the denser regions, so fewer 
are transmitted. The image displays the pattern of transmitted 
electrons. Instead of using glass lenses, both the SEM and TEM 
use electromagnets as lenses to bend the paths of the electrons, 
ultimately focusing the image onto a monitor for viewing.
Electron microscopes have revealed many subcellular 
structures that were impossible to resolve with the light micro-
scope. But the light microscope offers advantages, especially 
in studying living cells. A disadvantage of electron microscopy 
is that the methods customarily used to prepare the specimen 
kill the cells and can introduce artifacts, structural features 
seen in micrographs that do not exist in the living cell.
In the past several decades, light microscopy has been revital-
ized by major technical advances (see Figure 7.3). Labeling indi-
vidual cellular molecules or structures with fluorescent markers 
has made it possible to see such structures with increasing detail. 
In addition, both confocal and deconvolution microscopy 
have produced sharper images of three-dimensional tissues and 
cells. Finally, a group of new techniques and labeling molecules 
developed in recent years, called super-resolution microscopy, has 
allowed researchers to “break” the resolution barrier and distin-
guish subcellular structures as small as 10–20 nm across.
A recently developed new type of TEM called cryo-electron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) (see Figure 7.3) allows specimens to be 
preserved at extremely low temperatures. This avoids the use 
of preservatives, allowing visualization of structures in their 
cellular environment. This method is increasingly used to 
complement X-ray crystallography in revealing protein com-
plexes and subcellular structures like ribosomes, described 
later. Cryo-EM has even been used to resolve some individual 
proteins. The Nobel Prize for Chemistry was awarded in 2017 
to the developers of this valuable technique.
Microscopes are the most important tools of cytology, the 
study of cell structure. Understanding the function of each 
structure, however, required the integration of cytology and 
biochemistry, the study of the chemical processes (metabo-
lism) of cells.
Cell Fractionation
A useful technique for studying cell structure and function 
is cell fractionation (Figure 7.4), which takes cells apart 
Application Cell fractionation is used to separate (fraction-
ate) cell components based on size and density.
Technique Cells are homogenized in a blender to break 
them up. The resulting mixture (homogenate) is centrifuged. 
The liquid above the pellet (supernatant) is poured into 
another tube and centrifuged at a higher speed for a longer 
period. This process is repeated several times. This process, 
called differential centrifugation, results in a series of pellets, 
each containing different cell components.
Centrifugation
Homogenization
Tissue
cells
Homogenate
Centrifuged at
1,000 g
(1,000 times the
force of gravity)
for 10 min
20,000 g
Supernatant 
poured into next 
tube
Differential
centrifugation
Pellet rich in
nuclei and
cellular debris
20 min
80,000 g
60 min
150,000 g
3 hr
Pellet rich in
mitochondria
(and chloro-
plasts if cells
are from a plant)
Pellet rich in
“microsomes”
(pieces of plasma
membranes and
cells’ internal
membranes) Pellet rich in
ribosomes
Cell Fractionation
. Figure 7.4 Research Method
MAKE CONNECTIONS If you wanted to study the process of 
translation of proteins from mRNA, which part of which fraction 
would you use? (See Figure 5.22.)
Results In early experiments, 
researchers used microscopy to 
identify the organelles in each 
pellet and biochemical methods 
to determine their metabolic 
functions. These identifications 
established a baseline for this method, enabling  
today’s researchers to know which cell fraction they should 
collect in order to isolate and study particular organelles.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   166 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 168 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 167
and separates major organelles and other subcellular struc-
tures from one another. The piece of equipment that is used 
for this task is the centrifuge, which spins test tubes holding 
mixtures of disrupted cells at a series of increasing speeds, 
a process called differential centrifugation. At each speed, the 
resulting force causes a subset of the cell components to 
settle to the bottom of the tube, forming a pellet. At lower 
speeds, the pellet consists of larger components, and higher 
speeds result in a pellet with smaller components.
Cell fractionation enables researchers to prepare spe-
cific cell components in bulk and identify their functions, 
a task not usually possible with intact cells. For example, 
on one of the cell fractions, biochemical tests showed 
the presence of enzymes involved in cellular respiration, 
while electron microscopy revealed large numbers of 
the organelles called mitochondria. Together, these data 
helped biologists determine that mitochondria are the 
sites of cellular respiration. Biochemistry and cytology 
thus complement each other in correlating cell function 
with structure.
CONCEPT CHECK 7.1
1. How do stains used for light microscopy compare with those 
used for electron microscopy?
2. WHAT IF? Which type of microscope would you use to study 
(a) the internal structure of a plant cell and (b) fluorescently 
labeled nervous tissue?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Eukaryotic cells have internal  
membranes that compartmentalize 
their functions
Cells—the basic structural and functional units of every 
organism—are of two distinct types: prokaryotic and eukary-
otic. Organisms of the domains Bacteria and Archaea consist 
of prokaryotic cells. Organisms of the domain Eukarya— 
protists, fungi, animals, and plants—all consist of eukary-
otic cells. (“Protist” is an informal term referring to a diverse 
group of mostly unicellular eukaryotes.)
Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
All cells share certain basic features: They are all bounded by a 
selective barrier, called the plasma membrane (or the cell mem-
brane). Inside all cells is a semifluid, jellylike substance called 
cytosol, in which subcellular components are suspended. All 
cells contain chromosomes, which carry genes in the form of 
DNA. And all cells have ribosomes, tiny complexes that make 
proteins according to instructions from the genes.
A major difference between prokaryotic and eukaryotic 
cells is the location of their DNA. In a eukaryotic cell, 
most of the DNA is in an organelle called the nucleus, which 
is bounded by a double membrane (see Figure 7.8). In a 
prokaryotic cell, the DNA is concentrated in a region that 
is not membrane-enclosed, called the nucleoid (Figure 7.5). 
CONCEPT 7.2
Fimbriae: attachment structures on
the surface of some prokaryotes 
(not visible on TEM)
Nucleoid: region where the
cell’s DNA is located (not
enclosed by a membrane)
Ribosomes: complexes that
synthesize proteins
Plasma membrane: membrane
enclosing the cytoplasm
Cell wall: rigid structure outside
the plasma membrane
Glycocalyx: outer coating
of many prokaryotes, 
consisting of a capsule 
or a slime layer
Flagella: locomotion
organelles of
some prokaryotes
0.5 om
A thin section through the
bacterium Corynebacterium
diphtheriae (colorized TEM)
(b)
(a)A typical
rod-shaped bacterium 
Bacterial
chromosome
. Figure 7.5 A prokaryotic cell. Lacking a true nucleus and the other membrane-enclosed organelles 
of the eukaryotic cell, the prokaryotic cell appears much simpler in internal structure. Prokaryotes include 
bacteria and archaea; the general cell structure of these two domains is quite similar.
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
Prokaryotic Cell Structure and 
Function
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   167 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 169 ===

168 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Eukaryotic means “true nucleus” (from the Greek eu, true, 
and karyon, kernel, referring to the nucleus), and prokaryotic 
means “before nucleus” (from the Greek pro, before), reflect-
ing the earlier evolution of prokaryotic cells.
The interior of either type of cell is called the cytoplasm; 
in eukaryotic cells, this term refers only to the region between 
the nucleus and the plasma membrane. Within the cyto-
plasm of a eukaryotic cell, suspended in cytosol, are a vari-
ety of organelles of specialized form and function. These 
 m e m b r a n e - b o u n d e d  s t r u c t u r e s  a r e  a b s e n t  i n  a l m o s t  a l l  p r o-
karyotic cells, another distinction between prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cells. In spite of the absence of organelles, though, 
the prokaryotic cytoplasm is not a formless soup. For exam-
ple, some prokaryotes contain regions surrounded by proteins 
(not membranes), within which specific reactions take place.
Eukaryotic cells are generally much larger than prokaryotic 
cells (see Figure 7.2). Size is a general feature of cell structure 
that relates to function. The logistics of carrying out cellular 
metabolism sets limits on cell size. At the lower limit, the 
smallest cells known are bacteria called mycoplasmas, which 
have diameters between 0.1 and 1.0 µm. These are perhaps 
the smallest packages with enough DNA to program metabo-
lism and enough enzymes and other cellular equipment to 
carry out the activities necessary for a cell to sustain itself and 
reproduce. Typical bacteria are 1–5 µm in diameter, about ten 
times the size of mycoplasmas. Eukaryotic cells are typically 
10–100 µm in diameter.
Metabolic requirements also impose theoretical upper lim-
its on the size that is practical for a single cell. At the boundary 
of every cell, the plasma membrane functions as a selective 
barrier that allows passage of enough oxygen, nutrients, and 
wastes to service the entire cell (Figure 7.6). For each square 
micrometer of membrane, only a limited amount of a particu-
lar substance can cross per second, so the ratio of surface area 
to volume is critical. As a cell (or any other object) increases 
in size, its surface area grows proportionately less than its 
volume. (Area is proportional to a linear dimension squared, 
whereas volume is proportional to the linear dimension 
cubed.) Thus, a smaller cell has a greater ratio of surface area to 
volume: Compare the calculations for the first two “cells” in 
Figure 7.7. The Scientific Skills Exercise gives you a chance to 
calculate the volumes and surface areas of two actual cells—a 
mature yeast cell and a cell budding from it. To explore differ-
ent ways that the surface area of cells is maximized in various 
organisms, see Make Connections Figure 33.8.
The need for a surface area large enough to accommodate 
the volume helps explain the microscopic size of most cells 
and the narrow, elongated shapes of some cells, such as nerve 
cells. Larger organisms do not generally have larger cells than 
smaller organisms—they simply have more cells (see the far 
right of Figure 7.7). A sufficiently high ratio of surface area 
to volume is especially important in cells that exchange a lot 
of material with their surroundings, such as intestinal cells. 
Such cells may have many long, thin projections from their 
0.04 om
(a) Colorized TEM of a plasma membrane. The plasma membrane 
appears as a pair of dark bands separated by a gold band.
Hydrophobic
region
Carbohydrate side chains
Proteins
Phospholipid
Hydrophilic
region
Hydrophilic
region
(b) Structure of the plasma membrane 
Inside of cell
(cytoplasm)
Plasma membrane
Outside of cell
. Figure 7.6 The plasma membrane. The plasma membrane 
and the membranes of organelles consist of a double layer (bilayer) 
of phospholipids with various proteins attached to or embedded 
in it. The hydrophobic parts of phospholipids and membrane 
proteins are found in the interior of the membrane, while the 
hydrophilic parts are in contact with aqueous solutions on either 
side. Carbohydrate side chains may be attached to proteins or lipids 
on the outer surface of the plasma membrane.
VISUAL SKILLS What parts of the membrane diagram in 
(b) correspond to the dark bands in the TEM in (a)? What parts 
correspond to the gold band? (Review Figure 5.11.)
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Membranes
1
5
1
6
units2
150
units2
750
units2
1
unit3
125
units3
125
units3
6 1.2 6
Total surface area 
[(height 3 width of 1 side) 
3 6 sides 3 number of cells]
Total volume 
[(height 3 width 3 length 
of 1 cell) 3 number of cells]
Surface area-to- 
volume ratio 
[surface area 4 volume]
Surface area increases while
total volume remains constant
. Figure 7.7 Geometric relationships between surface area 
and volume. In this diagram, cells are represented as cubes. Using 
arbitrary units of length, we can calculate the cell’s surface area 
(in square units, or units2), 
volume (in cubic units, or 
units3), and ratio of surface 
area to volume. A high 
surface area-to-volume ratio 
facilitates the exchange of 
materials between a cell 
and its environment.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   168 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 170 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 169
Scientific Skills Exercise
Using a Scale Bar to Calculate Volume 
and Surface Area of a Cell
How Much New Cytoplasm and Plasma Membrane 
Are Made by a Growing Yeast Cell? The unicellular yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae divides by budding off a small new cell 
that then grows to full size (see the yeast cells at the bottom of 
Figure 7.8). During its growth, the new cell synthesizes new cyto-
plasm, which increases its volume, and new plasma membrane, 
which increases its surface area. In this exercise, you will use a 
scale bar to determine the sizes of a mature parent yeast cell and 
a cell budding from it. You will then calculate the volume and 
surface area of each cell. You will use your calculations to deter-
mine how much cytoplasm and plasma membrane the new cell 
needs to synthesize to grow to full size.
How the Experiment Was Done Yeast cells were grown 
under conditions that promoted division by budding. The cells 
were then viewed with a differential interference contrast light 
microscope and photographed.
Data from the Experiment This light micrograph shows a bud-
ding yeast cell about to be released from the mature parent cell:
1 om
Mature parent
cell
Budding
cell
Micrograph from K. Tatchell, using yeast cells grown for experiments described 
in L. Kozubowski et al., Role of the septin ring in the asymmetric localization of 
proteins at the mother-bud neck in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Molecular Biology 
of the Cell 16:3455–3466 (2005).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. Examine the micrograph of the yeast cells. The scale bar under 
the photo is labeled 1 µm. The scale bar works in the same way 
as a scale on a map, where, for example, 1 inch equals 1 mile. 
In this case the bar represents one thousandth of a millimeter. 
Using the scale bar as a basic unit, determine the diameter of 
the mature parent cell and the new cell. Start by measuring the 
scale bar and the diameter of each cell. The units you use are ir-
relevant, but working in millimeters is convenient. Divide each 
diameter by the length of the scale bar and then multiply by the 
scale bar’s length value to give you the diameter in micrometers.
2. The shape of a yeast cell can be approximated by a sphere. 
(a) Calculate the volume of each cell using the formula for the 
volume of a sphere:
V=4
3pr3
r d
Note that ! (the Greek letter pi) is a constant with an approxi-
mate value of 3.14, d stands for diameter, and r stands for radius, 
which is half the diameter. (b) What volume of new cytoplasm 
will the new cell have to synthesize as it matures? To determine 
this, calculate the difference between the volume of the full-sized 
cell and the volume of the new cell.
3. As the new cell grows, its plasma membrane needs to expand to 
contain the increased volume of the cell. (a) Calculate the sur-
face area of each cell using the formula for the surface area of a 
sphere: A=4pr2. (b) How much area of new plasma membrane 
will the new cell have to synthesize as it matures?
4. When the new cell matures, it will be approximately how 
many times greater in volume and how many times greater in 
surface area than its current size?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
surface called microvilli, which increase surface area without 
an appreciable increase in volume.
The evolutionary relationships between prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cells will be discussed later in this chapter, and 
prokaryotic cells will be described in detail elsewhere (see 
Chapter 27). Most of the discussion of cell structure that 
follows in this chapter applies to eukaryotic cells.
A Panoramic View of the Eukaryotic Cell
In addition to the plasma membrane at its outer surface, a 
eukaryotic cell has extensive, elaborately arranged internal 
membranes that divide the cell into compartments—the 
organelles mentioned earlier. The cell’s compartments pro-
vide different local environments that support specific meta-
bolic functions, so incompatible processes can occur simulta-
neously in a single cell. The plasma membrane and organelle 
membranes also participate directly in the cell’s metabolism 
because many enzymes are built right into the membranes.
The basic fabric of most biological membranes is a double 
layer of phospholipids and other lipids. Embedded in this lipid 
bilayer or attached to its surfaces are diverse proteins (see Figure 
7.6). However, each type of membrane has a unique composi-
tion of lipids and proteins suited to that membrane’s specific 
functions. For example, enzymes embedded in the membranes 
of the organelles called mitochondria function in cellular respi-
ration. Because membranes are so fundamental to the organi-
zation of the cell, Chapter 8 will discuss them in detail.
Before continuing with this chapter, examine the eukary-
otic cells in Figure 7.8. The generalized diagrams of an animal 
cell and a plant cell introduce the various organelles and 
show the key differences between animal and plant cells. The 
micrographs at the bottom of the figure give you a glimpse of 
cells from different types of eukaryotic organisms.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   169 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 171 ===

170 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Animal Cells 
Unicellular Fungi
Human cells from lining of uterus (colorized TEM)
Yeast cells: reproducing by budding 
(above, colorized SEM) and a single cell 
(right, colorized TEM)
Flagellum: motility 
structure present in 
some animal cells, 
composed of a cluster of 
microtubules within an 
extension of the plasma 
membrane
Rough ER Smooth ER
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER): network 
of membranous sacs and tubes; active in 
membrane synthesis and other synthetic 
and metabolic processes; has rough 
(ribosome-studded) and smooth regions
Chromatin: material consisting 
of DNA and proteins; visible in
a dividing cell as individual 
condensed chromosomes
Nucleolus: nonmembranous 
structure involved in production 
of ribosomes; a nucleus has 
one or more nucleoli
Nuclear envelope: double 
membrane enclosing the 
nucleus; perforated by 
pores; continuous with ER
NUCLEUS
Plasma membrane: 
membrane 
enclosing the cell
Golgi apparatus: organelle active 
in synthesis, modification, sorting, 
and secretion of cell products
Mitochondrion: organelle where 
cellular respiration occurs and 
most ATP is generated
Lysosome: digestive 
organelle where 
macromolecules are 
hydrolyzed
Centrosome: region 
where the cell’s 
microtubules are 
initiated; contains a 
pair of centrioles
Peroxisome: organelle with 
various specialized metabolic 
functions; produces hydrogen 
peroxide as a by-product and 
then converts it to water
Microvilli: 
membrane 
projections that 
increase the cell’s 
surface area
CYTOSKELETON:        
reinforces cell’s shape; 
functions in cell movement; 
components are made of 
protein. Includes:
Ribosomes (small brown 
dots): complexes that 
make proteins; free in 
cytosol or bound to 
rough ER or nuclear 
envelope
Microfilaments
Intermediate
filaments
Microtubules
Cell
Nucleus
Nucleolus 10 om Parent
cell
Buds5 om
Cell wall
Nucleus
Mitochondrion
Vacuole
1 om
Animal Cell (cutaway view of generalized cell)  
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Tour of an Animal Cell
. Figure 7.8 Exploring Eukaryotic Cells
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   170 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 172 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 171
Unicellular Algae
Plant Cells
Cells from duckweed (Spirodela oligorrhiza), 
a floating plant (colorized TEM)
Unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas 
(above, colorized SEM; right, colorized 
TEM)
Plant Cell (cutaway view of generalized cell)
Flagella
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Vacuole
Chloroplast
Cell wall
1 om
Rough 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Smooth 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Nuclear envelope
Nucleolus
Chromatin
NUCLEUS
Plasma membrane
Golgi apparatus
Mitochondrion
Chloroplast: photosynthetic 
organelle; converts energy of 
sunlight to chemical energy 
stored in sugar molecules
Peroxisome
Plasmodesmata: cytoplasmic 
channels through cell walls 
that connect the cytoplasms 
of adjacent cells
Microfilaments
Microtubules
CYTOSKELETON
Ribosomes (small brown dots)
Cell wall: outer layer that maintains 
cell’s shape and protects cell from 
mechanical damage; made of cellulose, 
other polysaccharides, and protein
Wall of adjacent cell
Central vacuole: prominent organelle
in older plant cells; functions include storage, 
breakdown of waste products, and hydrolysis 
of macromolecules; enlargement of the 
vacuole is a major mechanism of plant growth
8 om
Cell
Cell wall
Chloroplast
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Nucleolus
5 om
 Mastering Biology  
BioFlix® Animation: Tour of a Plant Cell 
Video: Turgid Elodea 
Video: Chlamydomonas
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   171 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 173 ===

172 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Within the nucleus, the DNA is organized into discrete 
units called chromosomes, structures that carry the genetic 
information. Each chromosome contains one long DNA 
molecule associated with many proteins, including small 
basic proteins called histones. Some of the proteins help coil 
the DNA molecule of each chromosome, reducing its length 
and allowing it to fit into the nucleus. The complex of DNA 
and proteins making up chromosomes is called chromatin. 
When a cell is not dividing, stained chromatin appears as a 
diffuse mass in micrographs, and the chromosomes cannot be 
distinguished from one another, even though discrete chro-
mosomes are present. As a cell prepares to divide, however, the 
chromosomes form loops and coil, condensing and becoming 
thick enough to be distinguished under a microscope as sepa-
rate structures (see Figure 16.23). Each eukaryotic species has a 
characteristic number of chromosomes. For example, a typical 
human cell has 46 chromosomes in its nucleus; the excep-
tions are human sex cells (eggs and sperm), which have only 
23 chromosomes. A fruit fly cell has 8 chromosomes in most 
cells and 4 in the sex cells.
A prominent structure within the nondividing nucleus is 
the nucleolus (plural, nucleoli), which appears through the 
electron microscope as a mass of densely stained granules 
and fibers adjoining part of the chromatin. Here a type 
of RNA called ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized 
from genes in the DNA. Also in the nucleo-
lus, proteins imported from the cytoplasm 
are assembled with rRNA into large and 
small subunits of ribosomes. These sub-
units then exit the nucleus through the 
nuclear pores to the cytoplasm, where a 
large and a small subunit can assemble 
into a ribosome. Sometimes there are 
two or more nucleoli; the number 
depends on the species and the stage in 
the cell’s reproductive cycle. The nucleoli 
may also play a role in controlling cell divi-
sion and the life span of a cell.
As we saw in Figure 5.22, the nucleus directs 
protein synthesis by synthesizing messenger RNA (mRNA) 
that carries information from the DNA. The mRNA is then 
transported to the cytoplasm via nuclear pores. Once an 
mRNA molecule reaches the cytoplasm, ribosomes translate 
the mRNA’s genetic message into the primary structure of a 
specific polypeptide. (This process of transcribing and translat-
ing genetic information is described in detail in Chapter 17.)
The eukaryotic cell’s genetic 
instructions are housed in the 
nucleus and carried out by the 
ribosomes
On the first stop of our detailed tour of the eukaryotic cell, 
let’s look at two cellular components involved in the genetic 
control of the cell: the nucleus, which houses most of the 
cell’s DNA, and the ribosomes, which use information from 
the DNA to make proteins.
The Nucleus: Information Central
The nucleus contains most of the genes in the 
eukaryotic cell. (Some genes are located in 
mitochondria and chloroplasts.) It is usu-
ally the most conspicuous organelle (see 
the purple structure in the fluorescence 
micrograph), averaging about 5 µm in 
diameter. The nuclear envelope encloses 
the nucleus (Figure 7.9), separating its con-
tents from the cytoplasm.
The nuclear envelope is a double mem-
brane. The two membranes, each a lipid 
bilayer with associated proteins, are separated 
by a space of 20–40 nm. The envelope is perforated 
by pore structures that are about 100 nm in diameter. At 
the lip of each pore, the inner and outer membranes of 
the nuclear envelope are continuous. An intricate protein 
structure called a pore complex lines each pore and plays 
an important role in the cell by regulating the entry and 
exit of proteins and RNAs, as well as large complexes of 
macromolecules. Except at the pores, the nuclear side of the 
envelope is lined by the nuclear lamina, a netlike array 
of protein filaments (in animal cells, called intermediate fila-
ments) that maintains the shape of the nucleus by mechani-
cally supporting the nuclear envelope. There is also much 
evidence for a nuclear matrix, a framework of protein fibers 
extending throughout the nuclear interior. The nuclear 
lamina and matrix may help organize the genetic material 
so it functions efficiently.
CONCEPT CHECK 7.2
1. Briefly describe the structure and function of the nucleus, 
the mitochondrion, the chloroplast, and the endoplasmic 
reticulum.
2. DRAW IT Draw a simplified elongated cell that measures 
125 * 1 * 1 arbitrary units. A nerve cell would be roughly this 
shape. Predict how its surface-to-volume ratio would com-
pare with those in Figure 7.7. Then calculate the ratio and 
check your prediction.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 7.3
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Nucleus and Ribosomes
5 om
Nucleus
Ribosomes: Protein Factories
Ribosomes, which are complexes made of ribosomal RNAs 
and proteins, are the cellular components that carry out 
protein synthesis (Figure 7.10). (Note that ribosomes are not 
membrane bounded and thus are not considered organelles.) 
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   172 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 174 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 173
Chromatin
Nuclear envelope:
Inner membrane
Outer membrane
Nucleolus
Nuclear pores
Rough ER
Pore
complex
Histone
protein
DNA
Close-up 
of nuclear
envelope
Surface of nuclear envelope 
(TEM). This specimen 
was prepared by a technique 
known as freeze-fracture, which 
cuts from the outer membrane 
to the inner membrane, 
revealing both.
Pore complexes (TEM). Each pore is
ringed by protein particles.
Nuclear lamina (TEM). The netlike lamina
lines the inner surface of the nuclear envelope. 
(The light circular spots are nuclear pores.)
Nucleus1 om
0.25 om
Ribosome
Chromatin. This 
segment of a chromosome 
shows two states of chromatin 
(DNA—blue—wrapped around 
histone proteins--purple) in a 
nondividing cell.  In preparation for 
cell division, the chromatin will 
become more condensed.
m
m
m
b
c
0.5 om
Nuclear envelope: 
Outer membrane
Inner membrane
. Figure 7.9 The nucleus and its envelope. Within the nucleus are the chromosomes, which 
appear as a mass of chromatin (DNA and associated proteins) and one or more nucleoli (singular, 
nucleolus), which function in ribosome synthesis. The nuclear envelope, which consists of two 
membranes separated by a narrow space, is perforated with pores and lined by the nuclear lamina.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Chromosomes 
contain the genetic material and reside in the 
nucleus. How does the rest of the cell get access 
to the information they carry? (See Figure 5.22.)
DRAW IT After you have read the section on ribosomes, circle a ribosome in the 
micrograph that might be making a protein that will be secreted.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
TEM showing ER and ribosomes
Ribosomes
0.25 om
ER Free ribosomes in cytosol
Ribosomes bound to ER
Diagram of a ribosome Computer model of a ribosome
Large
subunit
Small
subunit
. Figure 7.10 Ribosomes. This electron micrograph of a pancreas 
cell shows both free and bound ribosomes. The simplified diagram and 
computer model show the two subunits of a ribosome.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Venki Ramakrishnan:  
Studying ribosome structure
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   173 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 175 ===

174 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Cells with high rates of protein synthesis have particularly 
large numbers of ribosomes as well as prominent nucleoli, 
which makes sense, given the role of nucleoli in ribosome 
assembly. For example, a human pancreas cell, which makes 
many digestive enzymes, has a few million ribosomes.
Ribosomes build proteins in two cytoplasmic regions: At 
any given time, free ribosomes are suspended in the cytosol, 
while bound ribosomes are attached to the outside of the 
endoplasmic reticulum or nuclear envelope (see Figure 7.10). 
Bound and free ribosomes are structurally identical, and 
ribosomes can play either role at different times. Most of the 
proteins made on free ribosomes function within the cytosol; 
examples are enzymes that catalyze the first steps of sugar 
breakdown. Bound ribosomes generally make proteins that 
are destined for insertion into membranes, for packaging 
within certain organelles such as lysosomes (see Figure 7.8), 
or for export from the cell (secretion). Cells that specialize in 
protein secretion—for instance, the cells of the pancreas that 
secrete digestive enzymes—frequently have a high propor-
tion of bound ribosomes. (You will learn more about ribo-
some structure and function in Concept 17.4.)
CONCEPT CHECK 7.3
1. What role do ribosomes play in carrying out genetic instructions?
2. Describe the molecular composition of nucleoli and explain 
their function.
3. WHAT IF? As a cell begins the process of dividing, its 
chromosomes become shorter, thicker, and individually 
visible in an LM (light micrograph). Explain what is 
happening at the molecular level.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 7.4
The endomembrane system 
regulates protein traffic and 
performs metabolic functions
Many of the different membrane-bounded organelles of the 
eukaryotic cell are part of the endomembrane system, 
which includes the nuclear envelope, the endoplasmic reticu-
lum, the Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, various kinds of vesicles 
and vacuoles, and the plasma membrane. This system carries 
out a variety of tasks in the cell, including synthesis of pro-
teins, transport of proteins into membranes and organelles 
or out of the cell, metabolism and movement of lipids, and 
detoxification of poisons. The membranes of this system are 
related either through direct physical continuity or by the 
transfer of membrane segments as tiny vesicles (sacs made 
of membrane). Despite these relationships, the various mem-
branes are not identical in structure and function. Moreover, 
the thickness, molecular composition, and types of chemical 
reactions carried out in a given membrane are not fixed, but 
may be modified several times during the membrane’s life. 
Having already looked at the nuclear envelope, we will now 
focus on the endoplasmic reticulum and the other endomem-
branes to which the endoplasmic reticulum gives rise.
The Endoplasmic Reticulum:  
Biosynthetic Factory
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is such an extensive 
network of membranes that it accounts for more than half 
the total membrane in many eukaryotic cells. (The word 
endoplasmic means “within the cytoplasm,” and reticulum is 
Latin for “little net.”) The ER consists of a network of mem-
branous tubules and sacs called cisternae (from the Latin 
cisterna, a reservoir for a liquid). The ER membrane separates 
the internal compartment of the ER, called the ER lumen 
(cavity) or cisternal space, from the cytosol. And because the 
ER membrane is continuous with the nuclear envelope, the 
space between the two membranes of the envelope is con-
tinuous with the lumen of the ER (Figure 7.11).
There are two distinct, though connected, regions of the 
ER that differ in structure and function: smooth ER and rough 
ER. Smooth ER is so named because its outer surface lacks 
ribosomes. Rough ER is studded with ribosomes on the outer 
surface of the membrane and thus appears rough through the 
electron microscope. As already mentioned, ribosomes are 
also attached to the cytoplasmic side of the nuclear envelope’s 
outer membrane, which is continuous with rough ER.
Functions of Smooth ER
The smooth ER functions in diverse metabolic processes, 
which vary with cell type. These processes include synthesis 
of lipids, metabolism of carbohydrates, detoxification of 
drugs and poisons, and storage of calcium ions.
Enzymes of the smooth ER are important in the synthesis 
of lipids, including oils, steroids, and new membrane phos-
pholipids. Among the steroids produced by the smooth ER 
in animal cells are the sex hormones of vertebrates and the 
various steroid hormones secreted by the adrenal glands. The 
cells that synthesize and secrete these hormones—in the tes-
tes and ovaries, for example—are rich in smooth ER, a struc-
tural feature that fits the function of these cells.
Other enzymes of the smooth ER help detoxify drugs 
and poisons, especially in liver cells. Detoxification usually 
involves adding hydroxyl groups to drug molecules, mak-
ing them more water-soluble and easier to flush from the 
body. The sedative phenobarbital and other barbiturates are 
examples of drugs metabolized in this manner by smooth ER 
in liver cells. In fact, barbiturates, alcohol, and many other 
drugs induce the proliferation of smooth ER and its associated 
detoxification enzymes, thus increasing the rate of detoxifica-
tion. This, in turn, increases tolerance to the drugs, meaning 
that higher doses are required to achieve a particular effect, 
such as sedation. Also, because some of the detoxification 
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   174 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 176 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 175
The smooth ER also stores calcium ions. In muscle cells, for 
example, the smooth ER membrane pumps calcium ions from 
the cytosol into the ER lumen. When a muscle cell is stimu-
lated by a nerve impulse, calcium ions rush back across the 
ER membrane into the cytosol and trigger contraction of the 
muscle cell. In other cell types, release of calcium ions from 
the smooth ER triggers different responses, such as secretion 
of vesicles carrying newly synthesized proteins.
Functions of Rough ER
Many cells secrete proteins that are produced by ribosomes 
attached to rough ER. For instance, certain pancreatic cells 
synthesize the protein insulin in the ER and secrete this 
hormone into the bloodstream. As a polypeptide chain 
grows from a bound ribosome, the chain is threaded into 
the ER lumen through a pore formed by a protein complex 
in the ER membrane. The new polypeptide folds into its 
functional shape as it enters the ER lumen. Most secretory 
proteins are glycoproteins, proteins with carbohydrates 
covalently bonded to them. The carbohydrates are attached 
to the proteins in the ER lumen by enzymes built into the 
ER membrane.
After secretory proteins are formed, the ER membrane 
keeps them separate from proteins in the cytosol, which are 
produced by free ribosomes. Secretory proteins depart from 
the ER wrapped in the membranes of vesicles that bud like 
bubbles from a specialized region called transitional ER  
(see Figure 7.11). Vesicles in transit from one part of the cell 
to another are called transport vesicles; we will examine 
their fate shortly.
In addition to making secretory proteins, rough ER is a 
membrane factory for the cell; it grows in place by adding 
membrane proteins and phospholipids to its own membrane. 
As polypeptides destined to be membrane proteins grow 
from the ribosomes, they are inserted into the ER membrane 
itself and anchored there by their hydrophobic portions. 
Like the smooth ER, the rough ER also makes membrane 
phospholipids; enzymes built into the ER membrane assem-
ble phospholipids from precursors in the cytosol. The ER 
membrane expands, and portions of it are transferred in the 
form of transport vesicles to other components of the endo-
membrane system.
The Golgi Apparatus: Shipping and 
Receiving Center
After leaving the ER, many transport vesicles travel to the 
Golgi apparatus. We can think of the Golgi as a warehouse 
for receiving, sorting, shipping, and even some manufactur-
ing. Here, products of the ER, such as proteins, are modified 
and stored and then sent to other destinations. Not surpris-
ingly, the Golgi apparatus is especially extensive in cells 
specialized for secretion.
Nuclear
envelope
Ribosomes
Ribosomes
Rough ER
ER lumen
Smooth ER
Transitional ER
Transport vesicle
Cisternae
Smooth ER Rough ER 0.2 om
. Figure 7.11 Endoplasmic reticulum (ER). A membranous 
system of interconnected tubules and flattened sacs called 
cisternae, the ER is also continuous with the nuclear envelope, 
as shown in the cutaway diagram at the top. The membrane of 
the ER encloses a continuous compartment called the ER lumen 
(or cisternal space). Rough ER, which is studded on its outer 
surface with ribosomes, can be distinguished from smooth ER in 
the electron micrograph (TEM). Transport vesicles bud off from a 
region of the rough ER called transitional ER and travel to the Golgi 
apparatus and other destinations.
enzymes have relatively broad action, the proliferation of 
smooth ER in response to one drug can increase the need for 
higher dosages of other drugs as well. Barbiturate abuse, for 
instance, can decrease the effectiveness of certain antibiotics 
and other useful drugs.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   175 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 177 ===

176 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
The Golgi apparatus consists of a group of associated, flat-
tened membranous sacs—cisternae—looking like a stack of pita 
bread (Figure 7.12). A cell may have many, even hundreds, of 
these stacks. The membrane of each cisterna in a stack separates 
its internal space from the cytosol. Vesicles concentrated in the 
vicinity of the Golgi apparatus are engaged in the transfer of 
material between parts of the Golgi and other structures.
A Golgi stack has a distinct structural directionality, with 
the membranes of cisternae on opposite sides of the stack dif-
fering in thickness and molecular composition. The two sides 
of a Golgi stack are referred to as the cis face and the trans face; 
these act, respectively, as the receiving and shipping depart-
ments of the Golgi apparatus. The term cis means “on the same 
side,” and the cis face is usually located near the ER. Transport 
vesicles move material from the ER to the Golgi apparatus. A 
vesicle that buds from the ER can add its membrane and the 
contents of its lumen to the cis face by fusing with a Golgi 
membrane on that side. The trans face (“on the opposite side”) 
gives rise to vesicles that pinch off and travel to other sites.
Products of the endoplasmic reticulum are usually modi-
fied during their transit from the cis region to the trans region 
of the Golgi apparatus. For example, glycoproteins formed 
in the ER have their carbohydrates modified, first in the ER 
itself, and then as they pass through the Golgi. The Golgi 
removes some sugar monomers and substitutes others, 
TEM of Golgi apparatus
Cisternae
trans face
(“shipping” side of
Golgi apparatus)
cis face
(“receiving” side of
Golgi apparatus)
Golgi
apparatus
0.1 om
1
6
5
2
3
     Vesicles move
from ER to Golgi.
     Vesicles also
transport certain
proteins back to ER,
their site of function.
     Vesicles transport some proteins 
backward to less mature Golgi 
cisternae, where they function. 
     Vesicles coalesce to
form new cis Golgi cisternae.
     Cisternal
maturation:
Golgi cisternae
move in a cis-
to-trans
direction.
     Vesicles form and
leave Golgi, carrying
specific products to
other locations or to
the plasma mem-
brane for secretion.
4
. Figure 7.12 The Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks 
of associated, flattened sacs, or cisternae. Unlike the ER cisternae, these sacs 
are not physically connected, as you can see in the cutaway diagram. A Golgi 
stack receives and dispatches transport vesicles and the products they contain. 
A Golgi stack has a structural and functional directionality, with a cis face 
that receives vesicles containing ER products and a trans face that dispatches 
vesicles. The cisternal maturation model proposes that the Golgi cisternae 
themselves “mature,” moving from the cis to the trans face while carrying 
some proteins along. In addition, some vesicles recycle enzymes that had been 
carried forward in moving cisternae, transporting them “backward” to a less 
mature region where their functions are needed.
producing a large variety of carbohydrates. Membrane phos-
pholipids may also be altered in the Golgi.
In addition to its finishing work, the Golgi apparatus also 
manufactures some macromolecules. Many polysaccharides 
secreted by cells are Golgi products. For example, pectins and 
certain other noncellulose polysaccharides are made in the 
Golgi of plant cells and then incorporated along with cellu-
lose into their cell walls. Like secretory proteins, nonprotein 
Golgi products that will be secreted depart from the trans face 
of the Golgi inside transport vesicles that eventually fuse with 
the plasma membrane. The contents are released and the ves-
icle membrane is incorporated into the plasma membrane, 
adding to the surface area.
The Golgi manufactures and refines its products in stages, 
with different cisternae containing unique teams of enzymes. 
Until recently, biologists viewed the Golgi as a static struc-
ture, with products in various stages of processing transferred 
from one cisterna to the next by vesicles. While this may 
occur, research from several labs has given rise to a new 
model of the Golgi as a more dynamic structure. According to 
the cisternal maturation model, the cisternae of the Golgi actu-
ally progress forward from the cis to the trans face, carrying 
and modifying their cargo as they move. Figure 7.12 shows 
the details of this model. The reality probably lies somewhere 
between the two models; recent research suggests the central 
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   176 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 178 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 177
Hydrolytic enzymes and lysosomal membrane are made 
by rough ER and then transferred to the Golgi apparatus for 
further processing. At least some lysosomes probably arise by 
budding from the trans face of the Golgi apparatus (see Figure 
7.12). How are the proteins of the inner surface of the lyso-
somal membrane and the digestive enzymes themselves spared 
from destruction? Apparently, the three-dimensional shapes of 
these proteins protect vulnerable bonds from enzymatic attack.
Lysosomes carry out intracellular digestion in a variety 
of circumstances. Amoebas and many other unicellular pro-
tists eat by engulfing smaller organisms or food particles, 
a process called phagocytosis (from the Greek phagein, 
to eat, and kytos, vessel, referring here to the cell). The food 
vacuole formed in this way then fuses with a lysosome, whose 
enzymes digest the food (Figure 7.13a, top). Digestion prod-
ucts, including simple sugars, amino acids, and other mono-
mers, pass into the cytosol and become nutrients for the cell. 
Some human cells also carry out phagocytosis. Among them 
are macrophages, a type of white blood cell that helps defend 
the body by engulfing and destroying bacteria and other 
invaders (see Figure 7.13a, bottom, and Figure 7.31).
regions of the cisternae may remain in place, while the outer 
ends are more dynamic.
Before a Golgi stack dispatches its products by budding 
vesicles from the trans face, it sorts these products and tar-
gets them for various parts of the cell. Molecular identifi-
cation tags, such as phosphate groups added to the Golgi 
products, aid in sorting by acting like zip codes on mailing 
labels. Finally, transport vesicles budded from the Golgi may 
have external molecules on their membranes that recognize 
“docking sites” on the surface of specific organelles or on the 
plasma membrane, thus targeting the vesicles appropriately.
Lysosomes: Digestive Compartments
A lysosome is a membranous sac of hydrolytic enzymes that 
many eukaryotic cells use to digest (hydrolyze) macromol-
ecules. Lysosomal enzymes work best in the acidic environ-
ment found in lysosomes. If a lysosome breaks open or leaks its 
contents, the released enzymes are not very active because the 
cytosol has a near-neutral pH. However, excessive leakage from 
a large number of lysosomes can destroy a cell by self-digestion.
Nucleus
Lysosome
4 om
Plasma membrane
Digestive
enzymes
Lysosome
Food vacuole
Digestion
     Lysosome contains
active hydrolytic
enzymes.
1      Hydrolytic
enzymes digest
food particles.
3     Lysosome fuses
with food vacuole. 
2
A lysosome fuses with a food vacuole during the process of 
phagocytosis by a unicellular protist.
In this colorized TEM of a macrophage (a type of white blood cell), 
lysosomes are purple. They contain enzymes that digest foreign 
particles such as bacteria and pollen.
1 om
Vesicle containing
two damaged organelles
Mitochondrion
fragment
Vesicle 
Mitochondrion
Peroxisome
Lysosome
Digestion
Peroxisome
fragment
     Lysosome fuses with
vesicle containing
damaged organelles.
1      Hydrolytic enzymes
digest organelle
components.
2
This vesicle containing two damaged organelles is in the cytoplasm 
of a rat liver cell (TEM).
The vesicle with damaged organelles fuses with a lysosome. The 
organelles are then digested and their components recycled.
(a) Phagocytosis (b) Autophagy
. Figure 7.13 Lysosomes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   177 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 179 ===

178 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to recycle the 
cell’s own organic material, a process called autophagy. During 
autophagy, a damaged organelle or small amount of cytosol 
becomes surrounded by a double membrane (of unknown 
origin), and a lysosome fuses with the outer membrane of this 
vesicle (Figure 7.13b). The lysosomal enzymes dismantle the 
inner membrane and the enclosed material, and the resulting 
small organic compounds are released to the cytosol for reuse. 
With the help of lysosomes, the cell continually renews itself. 
A human liver cell, for example, recycles half of its macromol-
ecules each week.
The cells of people with inherited lysosomal storage 
diseases lack a functioning hydrolytic enzyme normally 
present in lysosomes. The lysosomes become engorged 
with indigestible material, which begins to interfere with 
other cellular activities. In Tay-Sachs disease, for example, a 
lipid-digesting enzyme is missing or inactive, and the brain 
becomes impaired by an accumulation of lipids in the cells. 
Fortunately, lysosomal storage diseases are rare in the general 
population.
Vacuoles: Diverse Maintenance 
Compartments
Vacuoles are large vesicles derived from the endoplasmic 
reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Thus, vacuoles are an integral 
part of a cell’s endomembrane system. Like all cellular mem-
branes, the vacuolar membrane is selective in transporting 
solutes; as a result, the solution inside a vacuole differs in 
composition from the cytosol.
Vacuoles perform a variety of functions in different kinds 
of cells. Food vacuoles, formed by phagocytosis, have 
already been mentioned (see Figure 7.13a). Many unicellular 
protists living in fresh water have contractile vacuoles that 
pump excess water out of the cell, thereby maintaining a suit-
able concentration of ions and molecules inside the cell (see 
Figure 8.13). In plants and fungi, certain vacuoles carry out 
enzymatic hydrolysis, a function shared by lysosomes in ani-
mal cells. (In fact, some biologists consider these hydrolytic 
vacuoles to be a type of lysosome.) In plants, small vacuoles 
can hold reserves of important organic compounds, such as 
the proteins stockpiled in the storage cells in seeds. Vacuoles 
may also help protect the plant against herbivores by storing 
compounds that are poisonous or unpalatable to animals. 
Some plant vacuoles contain pigments, such as the red and 
blue pigments of petals that help attract pollinating insects to 
flowers.
Mature plant cells generally contain a large central 
vacuole (Figure 7.14), which develops by the coalescence 
of smaller vacuoles. The solution inside the central vacuole, 
called cell sap, is the plant cell’s main repository of inorganic 
ions, including potassium and chloride. The central vacuole 
plays a major role in the growth of plant cells, which enlarge 
Central vacuoleCentral vacuole
Central
vacuole
Central
vacuole
Cell wallCell wall
ChloroplastChloroplast
NucleusNucleus
CytosolCytosol
5 om5 om
. Figure 7.14 The plant cell vacuole. The central vacuole is 
usually the largest compartment in a plant cell; the rest of the 
cytoplasm is often confined to a narrow zone between the vacuolar 
membrane and the plasma membrane (TEM).
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Central Vacuole
as the vacuole absorbs water, enabling the cell to become 
larger with a minimal investment in new cytoplasm. The 
cytosol often occupies only a thin layer between the central 
vacuole and the plasma membrane, so the ratio of plasma 
membrane surface to cytosolic volume is sufficient, even for a 
large plant cell.
The Endomembrane System: A Review
Figure 7.15 reviews the endomembrane system, showing the 
flow of membrane lipids and proteins through the various 
organelles. As the membrane moves from the ER to the Golgi 
and then elsewhere, its molecular composition and metabolic 
functions are modified, along with those of its contents. The 
endomembrane system is a complex and dynamic player in 
the cell’s compartmental organization.
We’ll continue our tour of the cell with some organelles 
that are not closely related to the endomembrane system but 
play crucial roles in the energy transformations carried out 
by cells.
CONCEPT CHECK 7.4
1. Describe the structural and functional distinctions between 
rough and smooth ER.
2. If a lysosome leaks enzymes, will a cell get destroyed by self-
digestion? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? Imagine a protein that functions in the ER but 
requires modification in the Golgi apparatus before it can 
achieve that function. Describe the protein’s path through 
the cell, starting with the mRNA molecule that specifies the 
protein.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   178 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 180 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 179
The Evolutionary Origins of Mitochondria 
and Chloroplasts
EVOLUTION Mitochondria and chloroplasts display simi-
larities with bacteria that led to the endosymbiont theory, 
illustrated in Figure 7.16. This theory states that an early 
ancestor of eukaryotic cells (a host cell) engulfed an oxygen-
using nonphotosynthetic prokaryotic cell. Eventually, the 
engulfed cell formed a relationship with the host cell in 
which it was enclosed, becoming an endosymbiont (a cell 
living within another cell). Indeed, over the course of evolu-
tion, the host cell and its endosymbiont merged into a single 
organism, a eukaryotic cell with the endosymbiont having 
become a mitochondrion. At least one of these cells may have 
then taken up a photosynthetic prokaryote, becoming the 
ancestor of eukaryotic cells that contain chloroplasts.
This is a widely accepted theory, which we will examine 
in more detail in Concept 25.3. This theory is consistent with 
many structural features of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
First, rather than being bounded by a single membrane like 
organelles of the endomembrane system, mitochondria and 
typical chloroplasts have two membranes surrounding them. 
(Chloroplasts also have an internal system of membranous 
sacs.) There is evidence that the ancestral engulfed prokary-
otes had two outer membranes, which became the double 
 Mastering Biology  
BioFlix® Animation:  
Endomembrane System
Mitochondria and chloroplasts 
change energy from one form  
to another
Organisms transform the energy they acquire from their 
surroundings. In eukaryotic cells, mitochondria and 
chloroplasts are the organelles that convert energy to forms 
that cells can use for work. Mitochondria (singular, 
mitochondrion) are the sites of cellular respiration, the meta-
bolic process that uses oxygen to drive the generation of 
ATP by extracting energy from sugars, fats, and other fuels. 
Chloroplasts, found in plants and algae, are the sites of 
photosynthesis. This process in chloroplasts converts solar 
energy to chemical energy by absorbing sunlight and using 
it to drive the synthesis of organic compounds such as sugars 
from carbon dioxide and water.
In addition to having related functions, mitochondria and 
chloroplasts share similar evolutionary origins, which we’ll 
look at briefly before examining their structures. In this sec-
tion, we’ll also consider the peroxisome, an oxidative organ-
elle. The evolutionary origin of the peroxisome, as well as its 
relation to other organelles, is still a matter of some debate.
CONCEPT 7.5
     The lysosome is available
for fusion with another
vesicle for digestion.
4      A transport vesicle carries
proteins to the plasma 
membrane for secretion.
5      The plasma membrane ex-
pands by fusion of vesicles; pro-
teins are secreted from the cell
by exocytosis.
6
Smooth ER
Rough ER
Plasma
membrane
Nucleus
Nuclear
envelope
cis Golgi
trans Golgi
      The nuclear envelope is 
connected to the rough ER, 
which is also continuous 
with the smooth ER.
      Membranes and proteins 
produced by the ER move via 
transport vesicles to the Golgi.
3
1
2
The Golgi pinches off transport
vesicles and other vesicles that
  give rise to lysosomes, other
types of specialized vesicles,
and vacuoles.
m Figure 7.15 Review: Relationships among organelles of the endomembrane system. 
The red arrows show some of the migration pathways for membranes and the materials they enclose.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   179 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 181 ===

180 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
number correlates with the cell’s level of metabolic activity. 
For example, cells that move or contract have proportionally 
more mitochondria per volume than less active cells.
Each of the two membranes enclosing the mitochon-
drion is a phospholipid bilayer with a unique collection of 
embedded proteins. The outer membrane is smooth, but 
the inner membrane is convoluted, with infoldings called 
cristae (Figure 7.17a). The inner membrane divides the 
mitochondrion into two internal compartments. The first 
is the intermembrane space, the narrow region between the 
inner and outer membranes. The second compartment, the 
mitochondrial matrix, is enclosed by the inner mem-
brane. The matrix contains many different enzymes as well 
as the mitochondrial DNA and ribosomes. Enzymes in the 
matrix catalyze some of the steps of cellular respiration. 
Other proteins that function in respiration, including the 
enzyme that makes ATP, are built into the inner membrane. 
As highly folded surfaces, the cristae give the inner mito-
chondrial membrane a large surface area, thus enhancing the 
productivity of cellular respiration. This is another example 
of structure fitting function. (Chapter 10 discusses cellular 
respiration in detail.)
Mitochondria are generally in the range of 1–10 µm long. 
Time-lapse films of living cells reveal mitochondria moving 
around, changing their shapes, and fusing or dividing into 
separate fragments, unlike the static structures seen in most 
diagrams and electron micrographs. These studies helped cell 
biologists understand that mitochondria in a living cell form 
a branched tubular network that is in a dynamic state of flux 
(see Figure 7.17b and c). In skeletal muscle, this network has 
been referred to by researchers as a “power grid.”
Chloroplasts: Capture of Light Energy
Chloroplasts contain the green pigment chlorophyll, along 
with enzymes and other molecules that function in the 
photosynthetic production of sugar. These lens-shaped 
organelles, about 3–6 µm in length, are found in leaves and 
other green organs of plants and in algae (Figure 7.18; see 
also Figure 7.26c).
The contents of a chloroplast are partitioned from the 
cytosol by an envelope consisting of two membranes sepa-
rated by a very narrow intermembrane space. Inside the 
chloroplast is another membranous system in the form of 
flattened, interconnected sacs called thylakoids. In some 
regions, thylakoids are stacked like poker chips; each stack is 
called a granum (plural, grana). The fluid outside the thy-
lakoids is the stroma, which contains the chloroplast DNA 
and ribosomes as well as many enzymes. The membranes of 
the chloroplast divide the chloroplast space into three com-
partments: the intermembrane space, the stroma, and the 
thylakoid space. This compartmental organization enables 
the chloroplast to convert light energy to chemical energy 
membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Second, 
like prokaryotes, mitochondria and chloroplasts contain 
ribosomes, as well as circular DNA molecules—like bacte-
rial  chromosomes—associated with their inner membranes. 
The DNA in these organelles programs the synthesis of some 
organelle proteins on ribosomes that have been synthesized 
and assembled there as well. Third, also consistent with 
their probable evolutionary origins as cells, mitochondria 
and chloroplasts are autonomous (somewhat independent) 
organelles that grow and reproduce within the cell.
Next, we focus on the structures of mitochondria and chlo-
roplasts, while providing an overview of their structures and 
functions. (In Chapters 10 and 11, we will examine their roles 
as energy transformers.)
Mitochondria: Chemical Energy Conversion
Mitochondria are found in nearly all eukaryotic cells, includ-
ing those of plants, animals, fungi, and most protists. Some 
cells have a single large mitochondrion, but more often a 
cell has hundreds or even thousands of mitochondria; the 
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nuclear 
envelope
Nucleus
Engulfing of oxygen-
using nonphotosynthetic 
prokaryote, which, over 
many generations of cells, 
becomes a mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Chloroplast
At least
one cell
Engulfing of
photosynthetic
prokaryote
Nonphotosynthetic
eukaryote
Ancestor of
eukaryotic cells (host cell)
Photosynthetic eukaryote
. Figure 7.16 The endosymbiont theory of the origins of 
mitochondria and chloroplasts in eukaryotic cells. According 
to this theory, the proposed ancestors of mitochondria were oxygen-
using nonphotosynthetic prokaryotes that were taken into host cells, 
while the proposed ancestors of chloroplasts were photosynthetic 
prokaryotes. The large arrows represent change over evolutionary 
time; the small arrows inside the cells show the process of the 
endosymbiont becoming an organelle, also over long periods of time.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   180 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 182 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 181
cell along tracks of the cytoskeleton, a structural network we 
will consider in Concept 7.6.
The chloroplast is a specialized member of a family of 
closely related plant organelles called plastids. One type 
of plastid, the amyloplast, is a colorless organelle that stores 
starch (amylose), particularly in roots and tubers. Another 
is the chromoplast, which has pigments that give fruits and 
flowers their orange and yellow hues.
during photosynthesis. (You will learn more about photosyn-
thesis in Chapter 11.)
As with mitochondria, the static and rigid appearance of 
chloroplasts in micrographs or schematic diagrams cannot 
accurately depict their dynamic behavior in the living cell. 
Their shape is changeable, and they grow and occasionally 
pinch in two, reproducing themselves. They are mobile and, 
with mitochondria and other organelles, move around the 
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Chloroplasts and Mitochondria
         
Thylakoid Intermembrane space
Stroma
Ribosomes
Inner and outer
membranes
Granum
DNA
Chloroplast
1 om
Chloroplasts
(a) Diagram and TEM of chloroplast (b) Chloroplasts in an algal cell
100 om
. Figure 7.18 The chloroplast, site of photosynthesis. (a) Many plants have lens-shaped 
chloroplasts, as shown here in a diagram and a TEM. A chloroplast has three compartments: the 
intermembrane space, the stroma, and the thylakoid space. Free ribosomes are present in the 
stroma, as are copies of chloroplast DNA molecules. (b) This light micrograph, at a much lower 
magnification than the TEM, shows a whole cell of the green alga Spirogyra crassa, which is 
named for the spiral arrangement of each cell’s chloroplasts.
DNA
Intermembrane space
Mitochondrion
Inner
membrane
Ribosomes
Separating Fusing
Cristae
Matrix
Outer
membrane
0.1 om
10 om
Mitochondria
Mitochondrial
DNA
Nuclear DNA
(a)Diagram and TEM of mitochondrion (c) Network of mitochondria in Euglena (LM)(b) Dynamic nature of
mitochondrial networks
. Figure 7.17 The mitochondrion, site of cellular respiration. (a) The inner and outer 
membranes seen in the drawing and TEM establish two compartments: the intermembrane space 
and the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae increase the surface area of the inner membrane. Circular 
DNA molecules are associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane. (b) Mitochondria are 
dynamic, at times separating into fragments or fusing. (c) The LM shows one protist (Euglena gracilis) 
at a much lower magnification than the TEM. The mitochondria form a branched tubular network; 
the mitochondrial matrix is stained green. The nuclear DNA is stained red; molecules of mitochondrial 
DNA appear as bright yellow spots.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Mitochondria
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   181 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 183 ===

182 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
The cytoskeleton is a network of 
fibers that organizes structures 
and activities in the cell
In the early days of electron microscopy, biologists thought 
that the organelles of a eukaryotic cell floated freely in the cyto-
sol. But improvements in both light microscopy and electron 
microscopy have revealed the cytoskeleton, a network of fibers 
extending throughout the cytoplasm (Figure 7.20). Bacterial cells 
also have fibers that form a type of cytoskeleton, constructed of 
proteins similar to eukaryotic ones, but here we will concentrate 
on eukaryotes. The eukaryotic cytoskeleton plays a major role in 
organizing the structures and activities of the cell.
Roles of the Cytoskeleton: Support and Motility
The most obvious function of the cytoskeleton is to give 
mechanical support to the cell and maintain its shape. This 
is especially important for animal cells, which lack walls. 
The remarkable strength and resilience of the cytoskeleton 
as a whole are based on its architecture. Like a dome tent, 
the cytoskeleton is stabilized by a balance between oppos-
ing forces exerted by its elements. And just as the skeleton 
of an animal helps fix the positions of other body parts, the 
cytoskeleton provides anchorage for many organelles and 
even cytosolic enzyme molecules. The cytoskeleton is more 
dynamic than an animal skeleton, however. It can be quickly 
dismantled in one part of the cell and reassembled in a new 
location, changing the shape of the cell.
Some types of cell motility (movement) also involve the 
cytoskeleton. The term cell motility includes both changes in  
Peroxisomes: Oxidation
The peroxisome is a specialized metabolic compartment 
bounded by a single membrane (Figure 7.19). Peroxisomes 
contain enzymes that remove hydrogen atoms from vari-
ous substrates and transfer them to oxygen (O2), producing 
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as a by-product (from which 
the organelle derives its name). These reactions have many 
different functions. Some peroxisomes use oxygen to break 
fatty acids down into smaller molecules that are transported 
to mitochondria and used as fuel for cellular respiration. 
Peroxisomes in the liver detoxify alcohol and other harmful 
compounds by transferring hydrogen from the poisonous 
compounds to oxygen. The H2O2 formed by peroxisomes is 
itself toxic, but the organelle also contains an enzyme that 
converts H2O2 to water. This is an excellent example of how 
the cell’s compartmental structure is crucial to its functions: 
The enzymes that produce H2O2 and those that dispose of 
this toxic compound are sequestered away from other cellular 
components that could be damaged.
Specialized peroxisomes called glyoxysomes are found 
in the fat-storing tissues of plant seeds. These organelles 
contain enzymes that initiate the conversion of fatty acids 
to sugar, which the emerging seedling uses as a source of 
energy and carbon until it can produce its own sugar by 
photosynthesis.
Peroxisomes grow larger by incorporating proteins made 
in the cytosol and ER, as well as lipids made in the ER and 
within the peroxisome itself. But how peroxisomes increase 
in number and how they arose in evolution—as well as what 
organelles they are related to—are still open questions.
Chloroplasts
Peroxisome
Mitochon-
drion
1 om
. Figure 7.19 A peroxisome. Peroxisomes are roughly spherical 
and often have a granular or crystalline core that is thought to be a 
dense collection of enzyme molecules. Chloroplasts and mitochondria 
cooperate with peroxisomes in certain metabolic functions (TEM).
CONCEPT CHECK 7.5
1. Describe two characteristics shared by chloroplasts and 
mitochondria. Consider both function and membrane 
structure.
2. Do plant cells have mitochondria? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? A classmate proposes that mitochondria and  
chloroplasts should be classified in the endomembrane 
system. Argue against the proposal.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 7.6
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Cytoskeleton
10 om
. Figure 7.20 The cytoskeleton. As shown in this fluorescence 
micrograph, the cytoskeleton extends throughout the cell. 
The cytoskeletal elements have been tagged with different 
fluorescent molecules: green for microtubules and reddish-orange 
for microfilaments. A third component of the cytoskeleton, 
intermediate filaments, is not evident here. (The blue color tags 
the DNA in the nucleus.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   182 3/14/20   1:52 AM

=== SIDE 184 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 183
cell location and movements of cell parts. Cell motility generally 
requires interaction of the cytoskeleton with motor proteins. 
There are many such examples: Cytoskeletal elements and 
motor proteins work together with plasma membrane mol-
ecules to allow whole cells to move along fibers outside the cell. 
Inside the cell, vesicles and other organelles often use motor 
protein “feet” to “walk” to their destinations along a track pro-
vided by the cytoskeleton. For example, this is how vesicles con-
taining neurotransmitter molecules migrate to the tips of axons, 
the long extensions of nerve cells that release these molecules 
as chemical signals to adjacent nerve cells (Figure 7.21). The 
cytoskeleton also manipulates the plasma membrane, bending 
it inward to form food vacuoles or other phagocytic vesicles.
Table 7.1 The Structure and Function of the Cytoskeleton
Property Microtubules (Tubulin Polymers) Microfilaments (Actin Filaments) Intermediate Filaments
Structure Hollow tubes Two intertwined strands of actin Fibrous proteins coiled into cables
Diameter 25 nm with 15-nm lumen 7 nm 8–12 nm
Protein subunits Tubulin, a dimer consisting of an 
/uni03B1-tubulin and a /uni03B2-tubulin
Actin One of several different proteins 
(including keratins)
Main functions Maintenance of cell shape; cell 
 motility; chromosome movements in 
cell division; organelle movements
Maintenance of cell shape; changes 
in cell shape; muscle contraction;  
cytoplasmic streaming (plant cells); 
cell motility; cell division (animal cells)
Maintenance of cell shape; 
 anchorage of nucleus and certain 
other organelles; formation of 
nuclear lamina
Fluorescence  
micrographs of  
fibroblasts.  
Connective tissue cells 
called fibroblasts are a 
favorite cell type for cell 
biology studies because 
they spread out flat and 
their internal structures 
are easy to see. In each 
fibroblast shown here, 
the structure of interest 
has been tagged with 
fluorescent molecules. 
In the third micrograph, 
the DNA in the nucleus 
has also been tagged 
(orange).
 25 nm
Tubulin dimer
Row of tubulin dimers
Microtubule
cd
10 om
7 nm
Actin subunit
Microfilament
10 om
Fibrous subunit (keratins
coiled together)
Keratin proteins
Intermediate filament
5 om
8–12 nm
Components of the Cytoskeleton
Now let’s look more closely at the three main types of fibers 
that make up the cytoskeleton: Microtubules are the thickest of 
the three types; microfilaments (also called actin filaments) are 
the thinnest; and intermediate filaments are fibers with diam-
eters in a middle range (Table 7.1).
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with George Langford:  
Investigating how motor proteins move cargo
(a)A motor protein that attaches to a receptor on a vesicle can
"walk" the vesicle along a microtubule or microfilament.
(b)
VesiclesMicrotubule 0.25 om
Two vesicles containing neurotransmitters move along a microtubule 
toward the tip of a nerve cell extension called an axon (SEM).
ATP
Microtubule
of cytoskeleton
Motor protein
(ATP powered)
Receptor
Vesicle
. Figure 7.21 Motor proteins and the cytoskeleton.
VISUAL SKILLS How many tubulin dimers are in the boxed row?
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   183 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 185 ===

184 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
their beating patterns. A flagellum has an undulating motion 
like the tail of a fish. In contrast, cilia have alternating power 
and recovery strokes, much like the oars of a  racing crew boat 
(Figure 7.23).
A cilium may also act as a signal-receiving “antenna” for 
the cell. Cilia that have this function are generally nonmotile, 
and there is only one per cell. (In fact, in vertebrate animals, 
it appears that almost all cells have such a cilium, which is 
called a primary cilium.) Membrane proteins on this kind of 
cilium transmit molecular signals from the cell’s environ-
ment to its interior, triggering signaling pathways that may 
lead to changes in the cell’s activities. Cilium-based signal-
ing appears to be crucial to brain function and to embryonic 
development.
Microtubules
All eukaryotic cells have microtubules, hollow rods 
constructed from globular proteins called tubulins. Each 
tubulin protein is a dimer, a molecule made up of two com-
ponents. A tubulin dimer consists of two slightly different 
polypeptides, /uni03B1-tubulin and /uni03B2-tubulin. Microtubules grow 
in length by adding tubulin dimers; they can also be dis-
assembled and their tubulins used to build microtubules 
elsewhere in the cell. Because of the orientation of tubulin 
dimers, the two ends of a microtubule are slightly differ-
ent. One end can accumulate or release tubulin dimers at a 
much higher rate than the other, thus growing and shrink-
ing significantly during cellular activities. (This is called 
the “plus end,” not because it can only add tubulin proteins 
but because it’s the end where both “on” and “off” rates are 
much higher.)
Microtubules shape and support the cell and also serve as 
tracks along which organelles equipped with motor proteins 
can move. In addition to the example in Figure 7.21, micro-
tubules guide vesicles from the ER to the Golgi apparatus and 
from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. Microtubules are 
also involved in the separation of chromosomes during cell 
division, as shown in Figure 12.7.
Centrosomes and Centrioles In animal cells, microtu-
bules grow out from a centrosome, a region that is often 
located near the nucleus. These microtubules function as 
compression-resisting girders of the cytoskeleton. Within the 
centrosome is a pair of centrioles, each composed of nine 
sets of triplet microtubules arranged in a ring (Figure 7.22). 
Although centrosomes with centrioles may help organize 
microtubule assembly in animal cells, many other eukaryotic 
cells lack centrosomes with centrioles and instead organize 
microtubules by other means.
Cilia and Flagella Some eukaryotic cells have flagella 
(singular, flagellum) and cilia (singular, cilium), cellular 
extensions that contain microtubules. A specialized arrange-
ment of the microtubules is responsible for the beating of 
these structures. (The bacterial flagellum, shown in Figure 7.5, 
has a completely different structure.) Many unicellular pro-
tists are propelled through water by cilia or flagella that act as 
locomotor appendages, and the sperm of animals, algae, and 
some plants have flagella. When cilia or flagella extend from 
cells that are attached tightly together in a sheet that is part of 
a tissue layer, they can move fluid over the surface of the tis-
sue. For example, the ciliated lining of the trachea (windpipe) 
sweeps mucus containing trapped debris out of the lungs (see 
the EMs in Figure 7.3). In a woman’s reproductive tract, the 
cilia lining the oviducts help move an egg toward the uterus.
Motile cilia usually occur in large numbers on the cell 
surface. Flagella are usually limited to just one or a few per 
cell, and they are longer than cilia. Flagella and cilia differ in 
VISUAL SKILLS How many microtubules are in a centrosome? In the 
drawing, circle and label one microtubule and describe its structure. 
Circle and label a triplet.
. Figure 7.22 Centrosome containing a pair of centrioles. 
Most animal cells have a centrosome, a region near the nucleus 
where the cell’s microtubules are initiated. Within the centrosome 
is a pair of centrioles, each about 250 nm (0.25 µm) in diameter. 
The two centrioles are at right angles to each other, and each is 
made up of nine sets of three microtubules. The blue 
portions of the drawing represent nontubulin 
proteins that connect the microtubule triplets.
Centrioles
Microtubule
Centrosome
Longitudinal section
of one centriole
0.25 om
Cross section
of the other centriole
Microtubules
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   184 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 186 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 185
and reattaches one step farther along the microtubule (see 
Figure 7.21). The outer doublets and two central microtubules 
are held together by flexible cross-linking proteins (blue in 
the diagram in Figure 7.24), and the walking movement is 
coordinated so that it happens on one side of the circle at 
a time. If the doublets were not held in place, the walking 
action would make them slide past each other. Instead, the 
movements of the dynein feet cause the microtubules—and 
the organelle as a whole—to bend.
Microfilaments (Actin Filaments)
Microfilaments are thin solid rods. They are also called 
actin filaments because they are built from molecules of 
actin, a globular protein. A microfilament is a twisted 
double chain of actin subunits (see Table 7.1). Besides occur-
ring as linear filaments, microfilaments can form structural 
networks when certain proteins bind along the side of such 
a filament and allow a new filament to extend as a branch. 
Like microtubules, microfilaments seem to be present in all 
eukaryotic cells.
In contrast to the compression-resisting role of microtu-
bules, the structural role of microfilaments in the cytoskel-
eton is to bear tension (pulling forces). A three-dimensional 
Though different in length, number per cell, and beat-
ing pattern, motile cilia and flagella share a common 
structure. Each motile cilium or flagellum has a group 
of microtubules sheathed in an extension of the plasma 
membrane (Figure 7.24a). Nine doublets of microtubules 
are arranged in a ring with two single microtubules in its 
center (Figure 7.24b). This arrangement, referred to as the 
“9 + 2” pattern, is found in nearly all eukaryotic flagella 
and motile cilia. (Nonmotile primary cilia have a “9 + 0” 
pattern, lacking the central pair of microtubules.) The 
microtubule assembly of a cilium or flagellum is anchored 
in the cell by a basal body, which is structurally very 
similar to a centriole, with microtubule triplets in a “9 + 0” 
pattern (Figure 7.24c). In fact, in many animals (including 
humans), the basal body of the fertilizing sperm’s flagellum 
enters the egg and becomes a centriole.
How does the microtubule assembly produce the bending 
movements of flagella and motile cilia? Bending involves 
large motor proteins called dyneins (red in the diagram in 
Figure 7.24) that are attached along each outer microtubule 
doublet. A typical dynein protein has two “feet” that “walk” 
along the microtubule of the adjacent doublet, using ATP for 
energy. One foot maintains contact, while the other releases 
 Mastering Biology  
Videos: Flagellum Movement in Swimming Sperm  
Flagellum Beating with ATP  
Paramecium Cilia
Power stroke Recovery stroke
Direction of swimming(a)
Direction of organism’s movement
15 om
Motion of flagella. A flagellum
usually undulates, its snakelike
motion driving a cell in the same
direction as the axis of the
flagellum. Propulsion of a human
sperm cell is an example of flagellate
locomotion (LM). 
5 om
(b)Motion of cilia. Cilia have a back-and-forth 
motion. The rapid power stroke moves the cell in 
a direction perpendicular to the axis of the cilium. 
Then, during the slower recovery stroke,the cilium 
bends and sweeps sideways, closer to the cell 
surface. A dense nap of cilia, beating at a rate of 
about 40 to 60 strokes a second, covers this 
Colpidium, a freshwater protist (colorized SEM).
. Figure 7.23 A comparison of the beating of flagella and motile cilia.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   185 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 187 ===

186 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
network formed by microfilaments just to the inside of the 
plasma membrane (cortical microfilaments) helps support 
the cell’s shape (see Figure 7.8). This network gives the outer 
cytoplasmic layer of a cell, called the cortex, the semisolid 
consistency of a gel, in contrast with the more fluid state of 
the interior cytoplasm. In some kinds of animal cells, such as 
nutrient-absorbing intestinal cells, bundles of microfilaments 
make up the core of microvilli, delicate projections that 
increase the cell’s surface area (Figure 7.25).
Microfilaments are well known for their role in cell motil-
ity. Thousands of actin filaments and thicker filaments made 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cilia and FlagellaDRAW IT In (a) and (b), circle and label the central pair of microtubules. In (a), show where 
they terminate, and explain why they aren’t seen in the cross section of the basal body in (c).
Plasma
membrane
Outer microtubule
doublet
Motor proteins 
(dyneins)
Central
microtubule
Cross-linking
protein between
outer doublets                   
Triplet
0.1 om
(b)
 0.1 om0.5 om
Microtubules
(c)
Cross section of basal body
(a)
Plasma
membrane
Basal body
Radial
spoke
A cross section through a motile cilium shows 
the ”9 + 2“ arrangement of microtubules 
(TEM). The outer microtubule doublets are held 
together with the two central microtubules by 
flexible cross-linking proteins (blue in art), 
including the radial spokes. The doublets also 
have attached motor proteins called dyneins 
(red in art).
A longitudinal section  
of a motile cilium 
shows microtubules 
running the length 
of the membrane-
sheathed structure 
(TEM).               
Basal body: The nine outer doublets of a cilium 
or flagellum extend into the basal body, where 
each doublet joins another microtubule to form a 
ring of nine triplets. Each triplet is connected    
to the next by nontubulin proteins (thinner blue 
lines in diagram). This is a ”9 + 0“ arrangement: 
The two central microtubules are not present 
because they terminate above the basal 
body (TEM).
. Figure 7.24 Structure of a flagellum or motile cilium.
Intermediate filaments
0.25 om
Microfilaments (actin 
filaments)
Microvillus
Plasma membrane
c Figure 7.25 A structural role of microfilaments. The surface 
area of this nutrient-absorbing intestinal cell is increased by its 
many microvilli (singular, microvillus), cellular extensions reinforced 
by bundles of microfilaments. These actin filaments are anchored to 
a network of intermediate filaments (TEM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   186 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 188 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 187
of a protein called myosin interact to cause contraction of 
muscle cells (Figure 7.26a); muscle contraction is described in 
detail in Concept 50.5. In the unicellular protist Amoeba and 
some of our white blood cells, localized contractions brought 
about by actin and myosin are involved in the amoeboid 
(crawling) movement of the cells. The cell crawls along a sur-
face by extending cellular extensions called pseudopodia 
(from the Greek pseudes, false, and pod, foot) and moving 
toward them (Figure 7.26b). In plant cells, actin-protein 
interactions contribute to cytoplasmic streaming, a circu-
lar flow of cytoplasm within cells (Figure 7.26c). This move-
ment, which is especially common in large plant cells, speeds 
the movement of organelles and the distribution of materials 
within the cell.
Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are named for their diameter, 
which is larger than the diameter of microfilaments but 
smaller than that of microtubules (see Table 7.1). While 
microtubules and microfilaments are found in all eukary-
otic cells, intermediate filaments are only found in the 
cells of some animals, including vertebrates. Specialized 
for bearing tension (like microfilaments), intermediate 
filaments are a diverse class of cytoskeletal elements. Each 
type is constructed from a particular molecular subunit 
belonging to a family of proteins whose members include 
the keratins. Microtubules and microfilaments, in contrast, 
are consistent in diameter and composition in all eukary-
otic cells.
Intermediate filaments are more permanent fixtures 
of cells than are microfilaments and microtubules, which 
are often disassembled and reassembled in various parts 
of a cell. Even after cells die, intermediate filament net-
works often persist; for example, the outer layer of our 
skin consists of dead skin cells full of keratin filaments. 
Intermediate filaments are especially sturdy and play an 
important role in reinforcing the shape of a cell and fixing 
the position of certain organelles. For instance, the nucleus 
typically sits within a cage made of intermediate fila-
ments. Other intermediate filaments make up the nuclear 
lamina, which lines the interior of the nuclear envelope 
(see Figure 7.9). In general, the various kinds of intermedi-
ate filaments seem to function together as the permanent 
framework of the entire cell.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Actin and Myosin in 
Muscle Contraction • Video: Amoeba Pseudopodia • Video: 
Cytoplasmic Streaming
Extending
pseudopodium
Inner cytoplasm
(more fluid)
Organelles
(a)
Actin 
filament
Myosin 
filament
Cortex (outer cytoplasm):
gel with actin network
Muscle cell
Myosin
head
(b)
0.5 μm
30 om
100 om
Amoeboid movement. Interaction of actin filaments with myosin 
causes contraction of the cell, pulling the cell’ s trailing end (at left)  
forward (to the right) (LM).
Myosin motors in muscle cell contraction. The ”walking” of
myosin projections (the so-called heads) drives the parallel myosin and 
actin filaments past each other so that the actin filaments approach each 
other in the middle (red arrows). This shortens the muscle cell. Muscle 
contraction involves the shortening of many muscle cells at the same 
time (TEM). 
(c)Cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells. A layer of cytoplasm cycles
around the cell, moving over tracks of actin filaments. Myosin motors 
attached to some organelles drive the streaming by interacting with 
the actin (LM).
. Figure 7.26 Microfilaments and motility. In these three 
examples, interactions between actin filaments and motor proteins 
bring about cell movement.
CONCEPT CHECK 7.6
1. Describe how cilia and flagella bend.
2. WHAT IF? Kinesins “walk” toward the plus end of microtu-
bules, while dyneins “walk” toward the minus end. Explain 
which of these molecular motors would transport a vesicle 
from the center of a mammalian cell toward the periphery.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   187 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 189 ===

188 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
wall. The secondary wall, often deposited in several lami-
nated layers, has a strong and durable matrix that affords 
the cell protection and support. Wood, for example, con-
sists mainly of secondary walls.
The Extracellular Matrix (ECM)  
of Animal Cells
Although animal cells lack walls akin to those of plant 
cells, they do have an elaborate extracellular matrix 
(ECM). The main ingredients of the ECM are glycoproteins 
and other carbohydrate-containing molecules secreted 
by the cells. (Recall that glycoproteins are proteins with 
covalently bonded carbohydrates.) The most abundant 
glycoprotein in the ECM of most animal cells is collagen, 
which forms strong fibers outside the cells (see Figure 5.18). 
In fact, collagen accounts for about 40% of the total pro-
tein in the human body. The collagen fibers are embedded 
in a network woven out of proteoglycans secreted by 
Extracellular components and 
connections between cells help 
coordinate cellular activities
Having crisscrossed the cell to explore its inner components, 
we complete our tour of the cell by returning to the surface of 
this microscopic world, where there are additional structures 
with important functions. The plasma membrane is usually 
regarded as the boundary of the living cell, but most cells 
synthesize and secrete materials extracellularly (to the outside 
of the cell). Although these materials and the structures they 
form are outside the cell, their study is important to cell biol-
ogy because they are involved in a great many essential cel-
lular functions.
Cell Walls of Plants
The cell wall is an extracellular structure of plant cells 
(Figure 7.27). This is one of the features that distinguishes 
plant cells from animal cells. The wall protects the plant 
cell, maintains its shape, and prevents excessive uptake of 
water. At the level of the whole plant, the strong walls of spe-
cialized cells hold the plant up against the force of gravity. 
Prokaryotes, some protists, and fungi also have cell walls, 
as you saw in Figures 7.5 and 7.8. Those organisms will be 
discussed in Chapters 27, 28, and 31.
Plant cell walls are much thicker than the plasma mem-
brane, ranging from 0.1 µm to several micrometers. The 
exact chemical composition of the wall varies from species 
to species and even from one cell type to another in the 
same plant, but the basic design of the wall is consistent. 
Microfibrils made of the polysaccharide cellulose (see 
Figure 5.6) are synthesized by an enzyme called cellulose 
synthase and secreted to the extracellular space, where 
they become embedded in a matrix of other polysaccha-
rides and proteins. This combination of materials, strong 
fibers in a “ground substance” (matrix), is the same basic 
architectural design found in steel-reinforced concrete and 
in fiberglass.
A young plant cell first secretes a relatively thin and 
flexible wall called the primary cell wall (see the 
micrograph in Figure 7.27). Between primary walls of 
adjacent cells is the middle lamella, a thin layer rich in 
sticky polysaccharides called pectins. The middle lamella 
glues adjacent cells together. (Pectin is used in cooking 
as a thickening agent in jams and jellies.) When the cell 
matures and stops growing, it strengthens its wall. Some 
plant cells do this simply by secreting hardening sub-
stances into the primary wall. Other cells add a secondary 
cell wall between the plasma membrane and the primary 
CONCEPT 7.7
Middle
lamella
Primary
cell walls
Secondary
cell walls
Secondary
cell wall
Primary
cell wall
Middle
lamella 
1 om
. Figure 7.27 Plant cell walls. The drawing shows the 
relationship between primary and secondary cell walls in  several 
mature plant cells. (Organelles aren’t shown because many cells 
with secondary walls, such as the water-conducting cells, lack 
organelles.) The TEM shows the cell walls where two cells  
come together. The multilayered partition between plant cells 
consists of adjoining walls individually secreted by the cells. 
Adjacent cells are glued together by a very thin layer called the 
middle lamella.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   188 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 190 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 189
in the set of proteins being made by the cell and therefore 
changes in the cell’s function. In this way, the extracellular 
matrix of a particular tissue may help coordinate the behavior 
of all the cells of that tissue. Direct connections between cells 
also function in this coordination, as we'll explore next.
Cell Junctions
Cells in an animal or plant are organized into tissues, organs, 
and organ systems. Neighboring cells often adhere, interact, 
and communicate via sites of direct physical contact.
Plasmodesmata in Plant Cells
It might seem that the nonliving cell walls of plants would 
isolate plant cells from one another. But in fact, as shown 
in Figure 7.29, many plant cell walls are perforated with 
plasmodesmata (singular, plasmodesma; from the Greek 
desma, bond), channels that connect cells. The plasma 
Micro-
filaments
Polysaccharide
molecule
Carbo-
hydrates
Proteoglycan
molecule
Proteoglycan complex
Core
protein
Plasma
membrane
CYTOPLASM
Fibronectin is one
ECM protein that
attaches the ECM
to integrins
embedded in
the plasma
membrane.
Integrins, membrane
proteins with two
subunits, bind to the
ECM on the outside 
and to associated 
proteins attached to
microfilaments on the
inside. This linkage 
can transmit signals
between the cell’s
external environment
and its interior and 
can result in changes 
in cell behavior.
EXTRACELLULAR FLUIDCollagen fibers
are embedded
in a web of 
proteoglycan
complexes.
A proteoglycan 
complex consists 
of hundreds of 
proteoglycan 
molecules attached 
noncovalently to a 
single long polysac-
charide molecule.
m Figure 7.28 Extracellular matrix (ECM) of an animal cell. The molecular composition and 
structure of the ECM vary from one cell type to another. In this example, three different types of 
ECM molecules are present: collagen, fibronectin, and proteoglycans.
cells (Figure 7.28). A proteoglycan molecule consists of a 
small core protein with many carbohydrate chains cova-
lently attached, so that it may be up to 95% carbohydrate. 
Large proteoglycan complexes can form when hundreds of 
proteoglycan molecules become noncovalently attached 
to a single long polysaccharide molecule, as shown in 
Figure 7.28. Some cells are attached to the ECM by ECM 
glycoproteins such as fibronectin. Fibronectin and 
other ECM proteins bind to cell-surface receptor proteins 
called integrins that are built into the plasma membrane. 
Integrins span the membrane and bind on their cytoplas-
mic side to associated proteins attached to microfilaments 
of the cytoskeleton. The name integrin is based on the word 
integrate: Integrins are in a position to transmit signals 
between the ECM and the cytoskeleton and thus to inte-
grate changes occurring outside and inside the cell.
Current research on fibronectin, other ECM molecules, 
and integrins reveals the influential role of the ECM in the 
lives of cells. By communicating with a cell through integrins, 
the ECM can regulate a cell’s behavior. For example, some 
cells in a developing embryo migrate along specific pathways 
by matching the orientation of their microfilaments to the 
“grain” of fibers in the extracellular matrix. Researchers have 
also learned that the extracellular matrix around a cell can 
influence the activity of genes in the nucleus. Information 
about the ECM probably reaches the nucleus by a combination 
of mechanical and chemical signaling pathways. Mechanical 
signaling involves fibronectin, integrins, and microfilaments 
of the cytoskeleton. Changes in the cytoskeleton may in turn 
trigger signaling pathways inside the cell, leading to changes 
Interior
of cell
Plasmodesmata0.5 om
Interior
of adja-
cent cell
Plasma membranes
Cell walls
. Figure 7.29 Plasmodesmata between plant cells. The 
cytoplasm of one plant cell is continuous with the cytoplasm of its 
neighbors via plasmodesmata, cytoplasmic channels through the cell 
walls (TEM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   189 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 191 ===

190 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Tight Junctions, Desmosomes,  
and Gap Junctions in Animal Cells
In animals, there are three main types of cell junctions: tight 
junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions. (Gap junctions are 
most like the plasmodesmata of plants, although gap junc-
tion pores are not lined with membrane—rather, they consist 
of proteins extending from each cell’s membrane that form 
a connecting pore.) All three types of cell junctions are espe-
cially common in epithelial tissue, which lines the external 
and internal surfaces of the body. Figure 7.30 uses epithelial 
cells of the intestinal lining to illustrate these junctions.
membranes of adjacent cells line the channel of each plas-
modesma and thus are continuous. Because the channels are 
filled with cytosol, the cells share the same internal chemi-
cal environment. By joining adjacent cells, plasmodesmata 
unify most of the plant into one living continuum. Water 
and small solutes can pass freely from cell to cell, and sev-
eral experiments have shown that in some circumstances, 
certain proteins and RNA molecules can do this as well (see 
Concept 36.6). The macromolecules transported to neigh-
boring cells appear to reach the plasmodesmata by moving 
along fibers of the cytoskeleton.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cell Junctions
Tight junction
Desmosome
Gap
junction
Intermediate
filaments
Ions or small
molecules
Plasma membranes
of adjacent cells
Space
between cells
Extracellular
matrix
Channels of a 
gap junction
Tight junctions prevent 
fluid from moving 
across a layer of cells.
TEM
0.5 om
Tight junction
1 om
TEM
0.1 om
TEM
At tight junctions, the plasma 
membranes of neighboring cells are 
very tightly pressed against each 
other, bound together by specific 
proteins. Forming continuous seals 
around the cells, tight junctions 
establish a barrier that prevents 
leakage of extracellular fluid across a 
layer of epithelial cells (see red 
dashed arrow). For example, tight 
junctions between skin cells make 
us watertight.
Desmosomes (one type of anchor-
ing junction) function like rivets, 
fastening cells together into strong 
sheets. Intermediate filaments 
made of sturdy keratin proteins an-
chor desmosomes in the cytoplasm. 
Desmosomes attach muscle cells 
to each other in a muscle. Some 
“muscle tears” involve the rupture 
of desmosomes.
Gap junctions (also called com-
municating junctions) provide 
cytoplasmic channels from one 
cell to an adjacent cell and in this 
way are similar in their function to 
the plasmodesmata in plants. Gap 
junctions consist of membrane pro-
teins extending from the mem-
branes of the two cells. These 
proteins create pores through 
which ions, sugars, amino acids, 
and other small molecules may 
pass. Gap junctions are necessary 
for communication between cells in 
many types of tissues, such as heart 
muscle, and in animal embryos. 
Tight Junctions
Desmosomes
Gap Junctions
. Figure 7.30  Exploring Cell Junctions in Animal Tissues
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   190 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 192 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 191
CONCEPT CHECK 7.7
1. In what way are the cells of plants and animals structurally 
different from single-celled eukaryotes?
2. WHAT IF? Nonliving cell walls isolate plant cells from one 
another. Still, most of the plant can be considered to be one 
living continuum. Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS The polypeptide chain that makes 
up a tight junction weaves back and forth through the mem-
brane four times, with two extracellular loops and one loop 
plus short C-terminal and N-terminal tails in the cytoplasm. 
Looking at Figure 5.14, what would you predict about the 
amino acid sequence of the tight junction protein?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
A cell is greater than the sum  
of its parts
From our panoramic view of the cell’s compartmental 
organization to our close-up inspection of each organelle’s 
architecture, this tour of the cell has shown the correlation 
of structure with function. (See Figure 7.8 to review cell 
structure.)
CONCEPT 7.8
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animations: Tour of an Animal  
Cell • Tour of a Plant Cell
Remember that none of a cell’s components work alone. 
For example, consider the microscopic scene in Figure 7.31. 
The large cell is a macrophage (see Figure 7.13a). It helps 
defend the mammalian body against infections by ingest-
ing bacteria (the smaller cells) into phagocytic vesicles. The 
10 om
Macrophage
Bacteria
Filopodium (extension
of the macrophage)
engulfing bacteria
. Figure 7.31 Coordination of activities in a cell. The ability of this macrophage to 
recognize, apprehend, and destroy bacteria involves coordination among components such as 
the cytoskeleton, lysosomes, and plasma membrane (colorized SEM).
 Mastering Biology Animation: Review of Animal Cell Structure and Function
macrophage crawls along a surface and reaches out to the 
bacteria with thin pseudopodia (specifically, filopodia). Actin 
filaments interact with other elements of the cytoskeleton in 
these movements. After the macrophage engulfs the bacte-
ria, they are destroyed by lysosomes produced by the elabo-
rate endomembrane system. The digestive enzymes of the 
lysosomes and the proteins of the cytoskeleton are all made 
by ribosomes. And the synthesis of these proteins is pro-
grammed by genetic messages dispatched from the DNA in 
the nucleus. All these processes require energy, which mito-
chondria supply in the form of ATP.
Cellular functions arise from cellular order: The cell is a 
living unit greater than the sum of its parts. The cell in Figure 
7.31 is a good example of integration of cellular processes, seen 
from the outside. But what about the internal organization 
of a cell? As you proceed in your study of biology to consider 
different cellular processes, it will be helpful to try to visual-
ize the architecture and furnishings inside a cell. Figure 7.32 
is designed to introduce you to some important biological 
molecules and molecules and to help you get a sense of their 
relative sizes and organization in the context of cellular struc-
tures and organelles. As you study this figure, see if you can 
shrink yourself down to the size of a protein and contemplate 
your surroundings.
CONCEPT CHECK 7.8
1. Colpidium colpoda is a unicellular protist that lives in fresh-
water, eats bacteria, and moves by cilia (see Figure 7.23b). 
Describe how the parts of this cell work together in the 
functioning of C. colpoda, including as many organelles and 
other cell structures as you can.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   191 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 193 ===

192 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Cell
wall
Plasma
membrane
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Chloroplast
Chloroplast
(b) Cellular respiration (Chapter 10) Cellular respiration, a  
multi-step process, generates ATP from food molecules. The ﬁrst two stages are 
carried out by enzymes in the cytoplasm and mitochondrial matrix; a few of these 
enzymes (pinkish-purple) are shown. The ﬁnal stage is carried out by proteins 
(bluish-purple) that form a "chain" in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
ATP synthase
Complex IVComplex III Stroma
Thylakoid
Complex II
Complex I
Q
Cyt c
Phosphofructokinase
Cyto-
plasm
Inner mitochondrial
membrane
Matrix
Isocitrate
dehydrogenase
Hexokinase
Enzyme in
signaling
pathway
Signaling
Transport
Receptor
Outside
cell
Proton
pump
Plant cell
Calcium
channel
Aquaporin
Plasma membrane
ATP synthase
NADP+
reductase
Photosystem II
Rubisco
Cytochrome
complex
Thylakoid
membrane
Pq
Pc
Photosystem I
Fd
(a) Membrane proteins (Chapter 8)
Proteins embedded in cellular membranes help 
transport substances and conduct signals across 
membranes. They also participate in other 
crucial cellular functions. Many proteins are 
able to move within the membrane.
This ﬁgure introduces a cast of characters
that you will learn more about as you
study biology. Refer back to this ﬁgure as 
you encounter these molecules in your studies.
A slice of a plant cell’s interior is illustrated in the center panel, with all structures 
and molecules drawn to scale. Selected molecules and structures are shown above 
and below, all enlarged by the same factor so you can compare their sizes. All 
protein and nucleic acid structures are based on data from the Protein Data Bank; 
regions whose structure has not yet been determined are shown in gray.
(c) Photosynthesis (Chapter 11) Photosynthesis produces sugars 
that provide food for all life on the planet. The process begins with large 
complexes of proteins and chlorophyll (green) embedded in the thylakoid 
membranes. These complexes trap light energy in molecules that are used by 
rubisco and other proteins in the stroma to make sugars.
/uni25BC Figure 7.32  Visualizing the Scale of the Molecular Machinery in a Cell
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   192 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 194 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 193
tRNA
Polypeptide
made of
amino
acids
mRNA
Nuclear
envelope
Nuclear
envelope
Motor
protein
Motor
protein
Ribosomes
Ribosomes
CytoskeletonCytoskeleton
Nuclear
pore
Nuclear
pore
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosome
Nucleosome: DNA wrapped
around 8 histone proteins
mRNA
DNA
DNA
Nucleus
Nucleus
DNA
DNA
RNA
polymerase
(e) Nuclear pore 
(Concept 7.3) The 
nuclear pore complex regulates 
molecular trafﬁc in and out of 
the nucleus, which is bounded 
by a double membrane. 
Among the largest structures 
that pass through the pore are 
the ribosomal subunits, which 
are built in the nucleus. 
(g) Cytoskeleton (Concept 7.6)
Cytoskeletal structures are polymers of protein subunits. 
Microtubules are hollow structural rods made of 
tubulin protein subunits, while microﬁlaments are cables 
that have two chains of actin proteins wound around 
each other.
Large subunit
Large subunit
Small subunit
Small subunit
Motor
protein
(myosin)
MicroƂlaOent
Vesicle
Tubulin
protein
subunit
(c + d
dimer)
Microtubule
Microtubule
MicroƂlament MicroƂlament
(f) Translation (Chapter 17) In the cytoplasm, the 
information in mRNA is used to assemble a polypeptide with a 
speciﬁc sequence of amino acids. Both transfer RNA (tRNA) 
molecules and ribosomes play a role. The eukaryotic ribosome, which 
includes a large subunit and a small subunit, is a colossal complex 
composed of four large ribosomal RNA (rRNA) molecules and 
more than 80 proteins. Through transcription and translation, the 
nucleotide sequence of DNA in a gene determines the amino acid 
sequence of a polypeptide, via the intermediary mRNA.
(d) Transcription (Chapter 17) In the nucleus, 
the information contained in a DNA sequence is 
transferred to messenger RNA (mRNA) by an enzyme 
called RNA polymerase. After their synthesis, mRNA 
molecules leave the nucleus via nuclear pores.
Scale within cell
25 nm 
25 nm 
Scale of enlarged structures
(h) Motor proteins
(Concept 7.6) Motor proteins, 
such as myosin, are responsible for 
transport of vesicles and movement of 
organelles within the cell.
1.List the following structures from largest to
smallest: proton pump, nuclear pore, cyt c,
ribosome.
Considering the structures of a nucleosome
and of RNA polymerase, speculate about 
what must happen before RNA polymerase 
can transcribe the DNA that is wrapped 
around the histone proteins of a nucleosome.
Find another myosin motor protein walking 
on C OicroﬁNCOent in this ﬁgure. 9hCt 
organelle is being moved by that myosin 
protein?
2.
3.
 Instructors: Additional questions related 
to this Visualizing Figure can be assigned in 
Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   193 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 195 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
    Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
CONCEPT 7.1
Biologists use microscopes and biochemistry  
to study cells (pp. 164–167)
• Improvements in microscopy that affect the parameters of mag-
nification, resolution, and contrast have catalyzed progress in the 
study of cell structure. Light microscopy (LM) and electron 
microscopy (EM), as well as other types, remain important tools.
• Cell biologists can obtain pellets enriched in particular cellular 
components by centrifuging disrupted cells at sequential speeds, 
a process known as cell fractionation.
? How do microscopy and biochemistry complement each other to 
reveal cell structure and function?
CONCEPT 7.2
Eukaryotic cells have internal membranes that 
compartmentalize their functions (pp. 167–172)
• All cells are bounded by a plasma membrane.
• Prokaryotic cells lack nuclei and other membrane-enclosed 
organelles, while eukaryotic cells have internal membranes 
that compartmentalize cellular functions.
• The surface-to-volume ratio is an important parameter affecting 
cell size and shape.
• Plant and animal cells have most of the same organelles: 
a nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and 
mitochondria. Chloroplasts are present only in cells of 
photosynthetic eukaryotes.
? Explain how the compartmental organization of a eukaryotic cell 
contributes to its biochemical functioning.
Cell Component Structure Function
CONCEPT 7.3
The eukaryotic cell’s 
genetic instructions are 
housed in the nucleus 
and carried out by the 
ribosomes (pp. 172–174)
? Describe the relationship 
between the nucleus and 
ribosomes.
Nucleus
ER
Surrounded by nuclear envelope 
(double membrane) perforated by 
nuclear pores; nuclear envelope is 
continuous with endoplasmic  
reticulum (ER)
Houses chromosomes, which are 
made of chromatin (DNA and 
proteins); contains nucleoli, where 
ribosomal subunits are made; pores 
regulate entry and exit of materials
Ribosome
 Two subunits made of ribosomal 
RNAs and proteins; can be free in 
cytosol or bound to ER
Protein synthesis
CONCEPT 7.4
The endomembrane 
system regulates protein 
traffic and performs 
metabolic functions  
(pp. 174–179)
? Describe the key role played 
by transport vesicles in the 
endomembrane system.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
Nuclear
envelope
Extensive network of membrane-
bounded tubules and sacs; ER 
membrane separates lumen  
from cytosol and is continuous  
with nuclear envelope
Smooth ER: synthesis of lipids,  
metabolism of carbohydrates,  
storage of calcium ions,  
detoxification of drugs and poisons
Rough ER: aids in synthesis of 
secretory and other proteins 
on bound ribosomes; adds 
carbohydrates to proteins to make 
glycoproteins; produces new 
membrane
Golgi apparatus
 Stacks of flattened membranous 
sacs; has polarity (cis and trans 
faces)
Modification of proteins, carbohy-
drates on proteins, and phospho-
lipids; synthesis of many polysac-
charides; sorting of Golgi products, 
which are then released in vesicles
Lysosome 
 Membranous sac of hydrolytic  
enzymes (in animal cells)
Breakdown of ingested substances, 
cell macromolecules, and damaged 
organelles for recycling
Vacuole Large membrane-bounded vesicle Digestion, storage, waste disposal, 
water balance, cell growth, and 
protection
7 Chapter Review
194 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   194 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 196 ===

 CHAPTER 7  Cell Structure and Function 195
6. DRAW IT Draw two eukaryotic cells. Label the structures listed 
here and show any physical connections between the structures 
of each cell: nucleus, rough ER, smooth ER, mitochondrion, 
centrosome, chloroplast, vacuole, lysosome, microtubule, 
cell wall, ECM, microfilament, Golgi apparatus, intermediate 
filament, plasma membrane, peroxisome, ribosome, nucleolus, 
nuclear pore, vesicle, flagellum, microvilli, plasmodesma.
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION (a) What cell structures best 
reveal evolutionary unity? (b) Give an example of diversity 
related to specialized cellular modifications.
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Imagine protein X, destined to span 
the plasma membrane; assume the mRNA carrying the genetic 
message for protein X has been translated by ribosomes in a 
cell culture. If you fractionate the cells (see Figure 7.4), in which 
fraction would you find protein X? Explain by describing its transit.
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Write a short 
essay (100–150 words) on this topic: Life is an emergent property 
that appears at the level of the cell. (See Concept 1.1.)
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Cell Component Structure Function
CONCEPT 7.5
Mitochondria and 
chloroplasts change 
energy from one form  
to another (pp. 179–182)
? What does the endosymbiont 
theory propose as the origin for 
mitochondria and chloroplasts? 
Explain.
Mitochondrion 
 Bounded by double membrane; 
inner membrane has infoldings
Cellular respiration
Chloroplast 
 Typically two membranes around 
fluid stroma, which contains thyla-
koids stacked into grana
Photosynthesis (chloroplasts are 
present in cells of photosynthetic 
eukaryotes, including plants)
Peroxisome Specialized metabolic com-
partment bounded by a single 
membrane
Contains enzymes that transfer H 
atoms from substrates to oxygen, 
producing H2O2 (hydrogen perox-
ide), which is converted to H2O
CONCEPT 7.6
The cytoskeleton is a network of fibers that organizes 
structures and activities in the cell (pp. 182–187)
• The cytoskeleton functions in structural support for the cell 
and in motility and signal transmission.
• Microtubules shape the cell, guide organelle movement, and sep-
arate chromosomes in dividing cells. Cilia and flagella are motile 
appendages containing microtubules. Primary cilia also play sen-
sory and signaling roles. Microfilaments are thin rods that func-
tion in muscle contraction, amoeboid movement, cytoplasmic 
streaming, and support of microvilli. Intermediate filaments 
support cell shape and fix organelles in place.
? Describe the role of motor proteins inside the eukaryotic cell and in 
whole-cell movement.
CONCEPT 7.7
Extracellular components and connections between 
cells help coordinate cellular activities (pp. 188–191)
• Plant cell walls are made of cellulose fibers embedded in other 
polysaccharides and proteins.
• Animal cells secrete glycoproteins and proteoglycans that form 
the extracellular matrix (ECM), which functions in support, 
adhesion, movement, and regulation.
• Cell junctions connect neighboring cells. Plants have 
plasmodesmata that pass through adjoining cell walls. Animal 
cells have tight junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions.
? Compare the structure and functions of a plant cell wall and the 
extracellular matrix of an animal cell.
CONCEPT 7.8
A cell is greater than the sum of its parts (pp. 191–193)
Many components work together in a functioning cell.
? When a cell ingests a bacterium, what role does the nucleus play?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Epithelial 
cell
The cells in this SEM are epithelial cells 
from the small intestine. Discuss how 
their cellular structure contributes to 
their specialized functions of nutrient 
absorption and as a barrier between 
the intestinal contents and the blood 
supply on the other side of the sheet of 
epithelial cells.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How do actin networks affect myosin motors?
Go to "Fussy about Filaments" at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C07_PRF.indd   195 3/14/20   1:53 AM

=== SIDE 197 ===

Figure 8.1 Successful learning relies on communication between brain cells. 
Here, the vesicles fusing with the plasma membrane of the top cell release molecules 
(yellow) that bind to membrane proteins (light green) on the surface of the bottom 
cell, triggering the proteins to change shape. The plasma membrane that surrounds 
each cell regulates its exchanges with its environment and surrounding cells.
8Cell Membranes
KEY CONCEPTS
Exocytosis: Large molecules 
are secreted when 
a vesicle fuses 
with the plasma 
membrane.
Endocytosis: Large 
molecules are 
taken in when 
the plasma 
membrane pinches
inward, forming a vesicle.
Passive
transport
of small molecules
doesn’t require
energy; it may
involve transport
proteins.
How does the plasma membrane regulate
inbound and outbound traffic?
Active transport
of small molecules requires 
energy and a transport protein.
Bulk
transport
moves large
molecules.
Transport
protein
VesiclePlasma membrane
P
ADP ATP
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 8
• Figure 8.12 Walkthrough: Osmosis
• BioFlix® Animation: Membrane Transport
For Instructors (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Membrane Transport: Diffusion 
and Passive Transport
• Tutorial: Membrane Transport: Bulk Transport
 8.1 Cellular membranes are fluid 
mosaics of lipids and proteins p. 197
 8.2 Membrane structure results in 
selective permeability p. 201
 8.3 Passive transport is diffusion of 
a substance across a membrane 
with no energy investment p. 202
 8.4 Active transport uses energy to move 
solutes against their gradients p. 206
 8.5 Bulk transport across the plasma 
membrane occurs by exocytosis 
and endocytosis p. 209
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Draw a 
plasma membrane (two lines) all the 
way down a piece of paper (or digitally). 
Label the cytoplasm and the extracellular 
fluid. At the top, draw the phospholipid 
bilayer in detail. As you read the chapter, 
draw and label membrane proteins that 
you encounter and diagram the different 
ways materials can enter or leave a cell.
Cytoplasm Plasma
membrane
Extracellular
ﬂuid
Phospholipid
bilayer
(draw in detail)
Glycoprotein
(carbohydrate
+ protein)
196
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   196 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 198 ===

Fibers of extra-
cellular matrix (ECM)
CYTOPLASMIC SIDE
OF MEMBRANE
EXTRACELLULAR
SIDE OF
MEMBRANE
Glyco-
protein
Carbohydrates
Glycolipid
Integral
protein
Peripheral
proteins
CholesterolPhospholipid
Microfilaments
of cytoskeleton
Cellular membranes are fluid 
mosaics of lipids and proteins
Lipids and proteins are the staple ingredients of membranes, 
although carbohydrates are also important. The most abun-
dant lipids in most membranes are phospholipids. Their 
 a b i l i t y  t o  f o r m  m e m b r a n e s  i s  i n h e r e n t  i n  t h e i r  m o l e c u l a r  s t r u c-
ture. A phospholipid is an amphipathic molecule, meaning 
it has both a hydrophilic (“water-loving”) region and a hydro-
phobic (“water-fearing”) region (see Figure 5.11). A phos-
pholipid bilayer can exist as a stable boundary between two 
aqueous compartments because the molecular arrangement 
shelters the hydrophobic tails of the phospholipids from water 
while exposing the hydrophilic heads to water (Figure 8.2).
Like membrane lipids, most membrane proteins are 
amphipathic. Such proteins can reside in the phospholipid 
bilayer with their hydrophilic regions protruding. This molec-
ular orientation maximizes contact of hydrophilic regions of a 
protein with water in the cytosol and extracellular 
fluid, while providing their hydrophobic parts 
with a nonaqueous environment. 
CONCEPT 8.1
VISUAL SKILLS Consulting Figure 5.11, circle and label 
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic portions of the enlarged 
phospholipids on the right. Explain what each portion contacts 
when the phospholipids are in the plasma membrane.
WATER
Hydrophilic
head
Two phospholipids
WATER
Hydrophobic
tail
. Figure 8.2 Phospholipid bilayer (cross section).
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Structure of the Plasma Membrane
m Figure 8.3 Current model of an animal cell’s plasma 
membrane (cutaway view). Lipids are colored gray and 
gold, proteins purple, and carbohydrates green.
Figure 8.3 shows the currently accepted model of the arrange-
ment of molecules in the plasma membrane. In this fluid 
mosaic model, the membrane is a mosaic of protein mol-
ecules bobbing in a fluid bilayer of phospholipids.
  197
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   197 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 199 ===

198 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Some membrane proteins seem to move in a highly directed 
manner, perhaps driven along cytoskeletal fibers by motor 
proteins. And other proteins simply drift in the membrane, as 
shown the classic experiment described in Figure 8.4.
A membrane remains fluid as temperature decreases until 
the phospholipids settle into a closely packed arrangement 
and the membrane solidifies, much as bacon grease forms 
lard when it cools. The temperature at which a membrane 
solidifies depends on the types of lipids it is made of. As the 
temperature decreases, the membrane remains fluid to a 
lower temperature if it is rich in phospholipids with unsatu-
rated hydrocarbon tails (see Figures 5.10 and 5.11). Because of 
kinks in the tails where double bonds are located, unsaturated 
hydrocarbon tails cannot pack together as closely as satu-
rated hydrocarbon tails, making the membrane more fluid 
(Figure 8.5a).
The steroid cholesterol, which is wedged between phos-
pholipid molecules in the plasma membranes of animal 
cells, has different effects on membrane fluidity at different 
temperatures (Figure 8.5b). At relatively high temperatures— 
at 37/uni00B0C, the body temperature of humans, for example—
cholesterol makes the membrane less fluid by restraining 
phospholipid movement. However, because cholesterol also 
hinders the close packing of phospholipids, it lowers the 
temperature required for the membrane to solidify. Thus, 
cholesterol can be thought of as a “fluidity buffer” for the 
membrane, resisting changes in membrane fluidity that can 
be caused by changes in temperature. Compared to animals, 
plants have very low levels of cholesterol; rather, related ste-
roid lipids buffer membrane fluidity in plant cells.
The proteins are not randomly distributed in the mem-
brane, however. Groups of proteins are often associated in 
long-lasting, specialized patches, where they carry out com-
mon functions. Researchers have found specific lipids in these 
patches as well and have proposed naming them lipid rafts; 
however, the debate continues about whether such structures 
exist in living cells or are an artifact of biochemical tech-
niques. In some regions, the membrane may be much more 
tightly packed with proteins than shown in Figure 8.3. Like all 
models, the fluid mosaic model is continually being refined as 
new research reveals more about membrane structure.
The Fluidity of Membranes
Membranes are not static sheets of molecules locked rigidly in 
place. A membrane is held together mainly by hydrophobic 
interactions, which are much weaker than covalent bonds 
(see Figure 5.18). Most of the lipids and some proteins can 
shift about sideways—that is, in the plane of the membrane, 
like partygoers elbowing their way through a crowded room. 
Very rarely, also, a lipid may flip-flop across the membrane, 
switching from one phospholipid layer to the other.
The sideways movement of phospholipids within the 
membrane is rapid. Adjacent phospholipids switch positions 
about 107 times per second, which means that a phospho-
lipid can travel about 2 mm—the length of a typical bacterial 
cell—in 1 second. Proteins are much larger than lipids and 
move more slowly, when they do move. Many membrane 
proteins seem to be held immobile by their attachment to the 
cytoskeleton or to the extracellular matrix (see Figure 8.3). 
Experiment Larry Frye and Michael Edidin, at Johns Hopkins 
University, labeled the plasma membrane proteins of a mouse cell 
and a human cell with two different markers and fused the cells. 
Using a microscope, they observed the markers on the hybrid cell.
Results
Membrane proteins
Mouse cell Human cell Hybrid cell
Mixed proteins 
after 1 hour
+
Conclusion The mixing of the mouse and human membrane 
proteins indicates that at least some membrane proteins move 
sideways within the plane of the plasma membrane.
Data from L. D. Frye and M. Edidin, The rapid intermixing of cell surface antigens 
after formation of mouse-human heterokaryons, Journal of Cell Science 7:319 (1970).
WHAT IF? Suppose the proteins did not mix in the hybrid cell, even 
many hours after fusion. Could you conclude that proteins don’t move 
within the membrane? What other explanation could there be?
Do membrane proteins move?
/uni25BC Figure 8.4 Inquiry
Cholesterol
Unsaturated hydrocarbon
tails (kinked) prevent packing,
enhancing membrane fluidity.
Fluid Viscous
Saturated hydrocarbon tails 
pack together, increasing 
membrane viscosity.
Cholesterol reduces membrane 
fluidity at moderate tempera- 
tures by reducing phospholipid 
movement, but at low tempera-
tures it hinders solidification by 
disrupting the regular packing of 
phospholipids.
(a) Unsaturated versus saturated hydrocarbon tails.
(b) Cholesterol within the animal cell membrane.
. Figure 8.5 Factors that affect membrane fluidity.
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   198 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 200 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 199
functions. Different types of cells contain different sets of 
membrane proteins, and the various membranes within a cell 
each have a unique collection of proteins.
Notice in Figure 8.3 that there are two major populations of 
membrane proteins: integral proteins and peripheral proteins. 
Integral proteins penetrate the hydrophobic interior of the 
lipid bilayer. The majority are transmembrane proteins, 
which span the membrane; other integral proteins extend 
only partway into the hydrophobic interior. The hydrophobic 
regions of an integral protein consist of one or more stretches of 
nonpolar amino acids (see Figure 5.14), typically 20–30 amino 
acids in length, usually coiled into a helices (Figure 8.6). The 
hydrophilic parts of the molecule are exposed to the aqueous 
solutions on either side of the membrane. Some proteins also 
have one or more hydrophilic channels that allow passage 
through the membrane of hydrophilic substances (even of water 
itself). Peripheral proteins are not embedded in the lipid 
bilayer at all; they are loosely bound to the surface of the mem-
brane, often to exposed parts of integral proteins (see Figure 8.3).
On the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane, 
some membrane proteins are held in place by attachment 
to the cytoskeleton. And on the extracellular side, certain 
membrane proteins may attach to materials outside the cell. 
For example, in animal cells, membrane proteins may be 
attached to fibers of the extracellular matrix (see Figure 7.28; 
integrins are one type of integral, transmembrane protein). 
These attachments combine to give animal cells a stronger 
framework than the plasma membrane alone could provide.
Figure 8.7 illustrates six major functions performed by 
proteins of the plasma membrane. A single cell may have 
different membrane proteins that carry out various functions, 
and one protein may itself carry out multiple functions. Thus, the 
membrane is a functional mosaic as well as a structural one.
Membranes must be fluid to work properly; the fluidity 
of a membrane affects both its permeability and the ability 
of membrane proteins to move to where their function is 
needed. Usually, membranes are about as fluid as olive oil. 
When a membrane solidifies, its permeability changes, and 
enzymatic proteins in the membrane may become inactive 
if their activity requires movement within the membrane. 
However, membranes that are too fluid cannot support pro-
tein function either. Therefore, extreme environments (for 
example, those with extreme temperatures) pose a challenge 
for life, resulting in evolutionary adaptations that include dif-
ferences in membrane lipid composition.
Evolution of Differences in Membrane  
Lipid Composition
EVOLUTION Variations in the cell membrane lipid compo-
sitions of many species appear to be evolutionary adaptations 
that maintain the appropriate membrane fluidity under spe-
cific environmental conditions. For instance, fishes that live 
in extreme cold have membranes with a high proportion of 
unsaturated hydrocarbon tails, enabling their membranes to 
remain fluid in spite of the low temperature (see Figure 8.5a). 
At the other extreme, some bacteria and archaea thrive at 
temperatures greater than 90/uni00B0C (194/uni00B0F) in thermal hot springs 
and geysers. Their membranes include unusual lipids that 
may prevent excessive fluidity at such high temperatures.
The ability to change the lipid composition of cell mem-
branes in response to changing temperatures has evolved in 
organisms that live where temperatures vary. In many plants 
that tolerate extreme cold, such as winter wheat, the per-
centage of unsaturated phospholipids increases in autumn, 
an adjustment that keeps the membranes from solidifying 
during winter. Some bacteria and archaea also exhibit differ-
ent proportions of unsaturated phospholipids in their cell 
membranes, depending on the temperature at which they are 
growing. Overall, natural selection has apparently favored 
organisms whose mix of membrane lipids ensures an appro-
priate level of membrane fluidity for their environment.
Membrane Proteins and Their Functions
Now we come to the mosaic aspect of the fluid mosaic model. 
Somewhat like a tile mosaic (shown here), a membrane is a 
collage of different proteins, often clustered 
together in groups, embedded in the 
fluid matrix of the lipid bilayer (see 
Figure 8.3). More than 50 kinds of 
proteins have been found in the 
plasma membrane of red blood 
cells, for example. Phospholipids 
form the main fabric of the 
membrane, but proteins deter-
mine most of the membrane’s 
b Tile mosaic.
c helix
N-terminus
C-terminus
EXTRACELLULAR SIDE
CYTOPLASMIC
SIDE
c Figure 8.6 The structure 
of a transmembrane protein. 
Bacteriorhodopsin (a bacterial 
transport protein) has a distinct 
orientation in the membrane, with 
its N-terminus outside the cell and 
its C-terminus inside. This ribbon 
model highlights the secondary 
structure of the hydrophobic parts, 
including seven transmembrane 
a helices, which lie mostly within 
the hydrophobic interior of 
the membrane. The nonhelical 
hydrophilic segments are in contact 
with the aqueous solutions on the 
extracellular and cytoplasmic sides 
of the membrane.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Functions of the Plasma 
Membrane
Proteins on a cell’s surface are important in the medi-
cal field. For example, a protein called CD4 on the surface 
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   199 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 201 ===

200 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
of immune cells helps the human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infect these cells, leading to acquired immune defi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS). Despite multiple exposures to HIV, 
however, a small number of people do not develop AIDS 
and show no evidence of HIV-infected cells. Comparing 
their genes with the genes of infected individuals, research-
ers learned that resistant people have an unusual form of a 
gene that codes for an immune cell-surface protein called 
CCR5. Further work showed that although CD4 is the main 
HIV receptor, HIV must also bind to CCR5 as a “co-receptor” 
to infect most cells (Figure 8.8a). An absence of CCR5 on 
the cells of resistant individuals, due to the gene alteration, 
prevents the virus from entering the cells (Figure 8.8b).
This information has been key to developing a treatment 
for HIV infection. Interfering with CD4 causes dangerous 
side effects because of its many important functions in cells. 
Discovery of the CCR5 co-receptor provided a safer target for 
development of drugs that mask this protein and block HIV 
entry. One such drug, maraviroc (brand name Selzentry), 
was approved for treatment of HIV in 2007; ongoing trials to 
determine its ability to prevent HIV infection in uninfected, 
at-risk patients have been disappointing.
The Role of Membrane Carbohydrates  
in Cell-Cell Recognition
Cell-cell recognition, a cell’s ability to distinguish one type of 
neighboring cell from another, is crucial to the functioning 
of an organism. It is important, for example, in the sorting 
of cells into tissues and organs in an animal embryo. It is also 
the basis for the rejection of foreign cells by the immune sys-
tem, an important line of defense in vertebrate animals (see 
Concept 47.1). Cells recognize other cells by binding to mol-
ecules, often containing carbohydrates, on the extracellular 
surface of the plasma membrane (see Figure 8.7d).
HIV
Receptor
(CD4) Receptor (CD4)
but no CCR5 Plasma
membrane
Co-receptor
(CCR5)
(a)HIV can infect a cell with 
CCR5 on its surface, as in 
most people.
(b)HIV cannot infect a cell lacking 
CCR5 on its surface, as in 
resistant individuals.
. Figure 8.8 The genetic basis for HIV resistance.
VISUAL SKILLS Some transmembrane proteins can bind to a 
particular ECM molecule and, when bound, transmit a signal into the cell. 
Use the proteins shown in (c) and (f) to explain how this might occur.
ATP
Enzymes
Transport. Left: A protein that spans 
the membrane may provide a hydrophilic 
channel across the membrane that is 
selective for a particular solute (see 
Figures 7.32a and 8.15a). Right: Other 
transport proteins shuttle a substance 
from one side to the other by changing 
shape (see Figure 8.15b). Some of these 
proteins hydrolyze ATP as an energy 
source to actively pump substances 
across the membrane.
Enzymatic activity. A protein built into 
the membrane may be an enzyme with 
its active site (where the reactant binds) 
exposed to substances in the adjacent 
solution. In some cases, several enzymes 
in a membrane are organized as a team 
that carries out sequential steps of a 
metabolic pathway.
Intercellular joining. Membrane 
proteins of adjacent cells may hook 
together in various kinds of junctions, 
such as gap junctions or tight junctions  
(see Figure 7.30). This type of binding 
is more long-lasting than that shown  
in (d).
Cell-cell recognition. Some glyco-
proteins serve as identiƂcation tags that 
are speciƂcally recognized by membrane 
proteins of other cells. This type of 
cell-cell binding is usually short-lived 
compared with that shown in (e). 
Signal transduction. A membrane          
protein (receptor) may have a binding 
site with a speciƂc shape that Ƃts the 
shape of a chemical messenger, such as 
a hormone. The external messenger 
(signaling molecule) may cause the 
protein to change shape, allowing it to 
relay the message to the inside of the 
cell, usually by binding to a cytoplasmic 
protein (see Figures 7.32a and 9.6).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Signaling molecule
Signal transduction
Receptor
Glyco-
protein
Attachment to the cytoskeleton and 
extracellular matrix (ECM). 
MicroƂlaOents or other eleOents of the 
cytoskeleton may be noncovalently 
bound to membrane proteins, a function 
that helps maintain cell shape and 
stabilizes the location of certain 
membrane proteins. Proteins that can 
bind to ECM molecules can coordinate 
extracellular and intracellular changes 
(see Figure 7.28).
. Figure 8.7 Some functions of membrane proteins. In many 
cases, a single protein performs multiple tasks.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Study Figures 2.16 and 5.17; each shows pairs 
of molecules binding to each other. What would you predict about CCR5 
that would allow HIV to bind to it? How could a drug molecule interfere 
with this binding?
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   200 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 202 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 201
Membrane carbohydrates are usually short, branched chains 
of fewer than 15 sugar units. Some are covalently bonded to 
lipids, forming molecules called glycolipids. (Recall that glyco 
refers to carbohydrate.) However, most are covalently bonded 
to proteins, which are thereby glycoproteins (see Figure 8.3).
The carbohydrates on the extracellular side of the plasma 
membrane vary from species to species, among individuals of 
the same species, and even from one cell type to another in 
a single individual. The diversity of the molecules and their 
location on the cell’s surface enable membrane carbohydrates 
to function as markers that distinguish one cell from another. 
For example, the four human blood types designated A, B, AB, 
and O reflect variation in the carbohydrate part of glycopro-
teins on the surface of red blood cells.
Synthesis and Sidedness of Membranes
Membranes have distinct inside and outside faces. The two 
lipid layers may differ in lipid composition, and each protein 
has directional orientation in the membrane (see Figure 8.6). 
Figure 8.9 shows how membrane sidedness arises: The asym-
metrical arrangement of proteins, lipids, and their associated 
carbohydrates in the plasma membrane is determined as the 
membrane is being built.
Plasma membrane:
Transmembrane
glycoprotein
Cytoplasmic face
Extracellular face
ER
Secretory
protein
Glycolipid
Transmembrane
glycoprotein
Attached
carbohydrate
Lipid bilayer
ER
lumen
Vesicle
Golgi
apparatus
Secreted
protein
Membrane
glycolipid
Glycolipid
  1  Secretory proteins, membrane proteins, and lipids are 
synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In the ER, 
carbohydrates (green) are added to the transmembrane 
proteins (purple dumbbells), making them glycoproteins. 
The carbohydrate portions may then be modified. Materials 
are transported in vesicles to the Golgi apparatus.
1
  1 Inside the Golgi apparatus, the glycoproteins 
undergo further carbohydrate modification, and 
lipids acquire carbohydrates, becoming glycolipids.
2
  1 The glycoproteins, glycolipids, and secretory 
proteins (purple spheres) are transported in 
vesicles to the plasma membrane.
3
  1 As vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane, 
the outside face of the vesicle becomes 
continuous with the inside (cytoplasmic) face of 
the plasma membrane. This releases the secretory 
proteins from the cell, a process called exocytosis, 
and positions the carbohydrates of membrane 
glycoproteins and glycolipids on the outside 
(extracellular) face of the plasma membrane.
4
. Figure 8.9 Synthesis of membrane components and their orientation in the membrane. 
The cytoplasmic (orange) face of the plasma membrane differs from the extracellular (aqua) face. 
The latter arises from the inside face of ER, Golgi, and vesicle membranes.
DRAW IT Draw an integral membrane protein 
extending from partway through the ER membrane 
into the ER lumen. Next, draw the protein where it 
would be located in a series of numbered steps ending 
at the plasma membrane. Would the protein contact 
the cytoplasm or the extracellular fluid? Explain.
CONCEPT CHECK 8.1
1. VISUAL SKILLS Carbohydrates are attached to plasma 
membrane proteins in the ER (see Figure 8.9). On which 
side of the vesicle membrane are the carbohydrates during 
transport to the cell surface?
2. WHAT IF? Some membrane proteins diffuse faster in the plasma 
membrane when the cytoskeleton or the extracellular matrix is 
artificially removed than when cells are unperturbed. Explain why. 
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 8.2
Membrane structure results  
in selective permeability
The biological membrane has emergent properties beyond 
those of the many individual molecules that make it up. The 
remainder of this chapter focuses on one of those proper-
ties: A membrane exhibits selective permeability; that is, 
it allows some substances to cross more easily than others. 
The ability to regulate transport across cellular boundaries is 
essential to the cell’s existence. We will see once again that 
form fits function: The fluid mosaic model helps explain how 
membranes regulate the cell’s molecular traffic.
A steady traffic of small molecules and ions moves across the 
plasma membrane in both directions. Consider the chemical  
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   201 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 203 ===

202 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
This “glucose transporter” is so selective that it even rejects 
fructose, a structural isomer of glucose (see Figure 5.3). Thus, 
the selective permeability of a membrane depends on both 
the discriminating barrier of the lipid bilayer and the specific 
transport proteins built into the membrane.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Selective Permeability 
of Membranes
What establishes the direction of traffic across a membrane? 
And what mechanisms drive molecules across membranes? 
We will address these questions next as we explore two modes 
of membrane traffic: passive transport and active transport.
exchanges between a muscle cell and the extracellular fluid 
that bathes it. Sugars, amino acids, and other nutrients enter 
the cell, and metabolic waste products leave it. The cell takes in 
O2 for use in cellular respiration and expels CO2. Also, the cell 
regulates its concentrations of inorganic ions, such as Na+, K+,  
Ca2+, and Cl-, by shuttling them one way or the other across 
the plasma membrane. In spite of heavy traffic through them, 
cell membranes are selective in their permeability: Substances 
do not cross the barrier indiscriminately. The cell is able to take 
up some small molecules and ions and exclude others.
The Permeability of the Lipid Bilayer
Nonpolar molecules, such as hydrocarbons, CO2, and O2, are 
hydrophobic, as are lipids. They can all therefore dissolve in 
the lipid bilayer of the membrane and cross it easily, without 
the aid of membrane proteins. However, the hydrophobic 
interior of the membrane impedes direct passage through the 
membrane of ions and polar molecules, which are hydrophilic. 
Polar molecules such as glucose and other sugars pass only 
slowly through a lipid bilayer, and even water, a very small 
polar molecule, does not cross rapidly relative to nonpolar 
molecules. A charged atom or molecule and its surrounding 
shell of water (see Figure 3.8) are even less likely to penetrate 
the hydrophobic interior of the membrane. Furthermore, 
the lipid bilayer is only one aspect of the gatekeeper system 
responsible for a cell’s selective permeability. Proteins built 
into the membrane play key roles in regulating transport.
Transport Proteins
Specific ions and a variety of polar molecules can’t move 
through cell membranes on their own. However, these hydro-
philic substances can avoid contact with the lipid bilayer by 
passing through transport proteins that span the membrane.
Some transport proteins, called channel proteins, function by 
having a hydrophilic channel that certain molecules or ions 
use as a tunnel through the membrane (see Figure 8.7a, left). 
For example, the passage of water molecules through the mem-
brane in certain cells is greatly facilitated by channel proteins 
known as aquaporins (Figure 8.10). Most aquaporin proteins 
consist of four identical polypeptide subunits. Each polypep-
tide forms a channel that water molecules pass through, single-
file, overall allowing entry of up to 3 billion water molecules 
per second. Without aquaporins, only a tiny fraction of these 
water molecules would pass through the same area of the cell 
membrane in a second. Other transport proteins, called carrier 
proteins, hold on to their passengers and change shape in a way 
that shuttles them across the membrane (see Figure 8.7a, right).
A transport protein is specific for the substance it translo-
cates (moves), allowing only a certain substance (or a small 
group of related substances) to cross the membrane. For 
example, a glucose carrier protein in the plasma membrane 
of red blood cells transports glucose across the membrane 
50,000 times faster than glucose can pass through on its own. 
CONCEPT CHECK 8.2
1. What property allows O2 and CO2 to cross a lipid bilayer 
without the aid of membrane proteins?
2. VISUAL SKILLS Examine Figure 8.2. Why is a transport 
protein needed to move many water molecules rapidly 
across a membrane?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Aquaporins exclude passage of 
hydronium ions (H3O+), but some aquaporins allow passage of 
glycerol, a three-carbon alcohol (see Figure 5.9), as well as H2O. 
Since H3O+ is closer in size to water than glycerol is, yet cannot 
pass through, what might be the basis of this selectivity?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 8.3
Passive transport is diffusion of 
a substance across a membrane 
with no energy investment
Molecules have a type of energy called thermal energy, due 
to their constant motion (see Concept 3.2). One result of this 
motion is diffusion, the movement of particles of any sub-
stance so that they spread out into the available space. Each 
molecule moves randomly, yet diffusion of a population of 
molecules may be directional. Imagine a synthetic membrane 
separating pure water from a solution of a dye in water. Study 
Figure 8.11a carefully to see how diffusion would result in 
equal concentrations of dye molecules in both solutions. At 
that point, a dynamic equilibrium will exist, with as many dye 
molecules crossing per second in one direction as in the other.
Here is a simple rule of diffusion: In the absence of any other  
forces, a substance will diffuse from where it is more concentrated  
c Figure 8.10 An 
aquaporin. This computer 
model shows water molecules 
(red and gray) passing 
through an aquaporin (blue 
ribbons), in a lipid bilayer 
(yellow, hydrophilic heads; 
green, hydrophobic tails).
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Peter Agre: Discovering aquaporins 
Animation: Aquaporin
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   202 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 204 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 203
(see Concept 2.2 and Figure 6.5b) and drives diffusion. 
Remember, though, that membranes are selectively permeable 
and therefore have different effects on the rates of diffusion of 
various molecules. Water can diffuse very rapidly across the 
membranes of cells with aquaporins, compared with diffusion 
in the absence of aquaporins. The movement of water across 
the plasma membrane has important consequences for cells.
Effects of Osmosis on Water Balance
To see how two solutions with different solute concentra-
tions interact, picture a U-shaped glass tube with a selectively 
permeable artificial membrane separating two sugar solu-
tions (Figure 8.12). Pores in this synthetic membrane are too 
small for sugar molecules to pass through but large enough 
for water molecules. However, tight clustering of water mol-
ecules around the hydrophilic solute molecules makes some 
to where it is less concentrated. Put another way, a substance 
diffuses down its concentration gradient, the region along 
which the density of a chemical substance increases or decreases 
(in this case, decreases). Diffusion is a spontaneous process, 
needing no input of energy. Each substance diffuses down its 
own concentration gradient, unaffected by the concentration 
gradients of other substances (Figure 8.11b).
Much of the traffic across cell membranes occurs by diffu-
sion. When a substance is more concentrated on one side of 
a membrane than on the other, there is a tendency for it to 
diffuse across, down its concentration gradient (assuming that 
the membrane is permeable to that substance). One important 
example is the uptake of oxygen by a cell performing cellular 
respiration. Dissolved oxygen diffuses into the cell across the 
plasma membrane. As long as cellular respiration consumes 
the O2 as it enters, diffusion into the cell will continue because 
the concentration gradient favors movement in that direction.
The diffusion of a substance across a biological membrane 
is called passive transport because it requires no energy. 
The concentration gradient itself represents potential energy 
(a)
(b)
Molecules of dye
WATER
Net diffusion Net diffusion Equilibrium
Net diffusion EquilibriumNet diffusion
Net diffusion EquilibriumNet diffusion
Membrane (cross section)
Diffusion of one solute. Molecules of dye can pass through 
membrane pores. Random movement of dye molecules will cause some 
to pass through the pores; this happens more often on the side with 
more dye molecules. The dye diffuses from the more concentrated side 
to the less concentrated side (called diffusing down a concentration 
gradient). A dynamic equilibrium results: Solute molecules still cross, but 
at roughly equal rates in both directions.
Diffusion of two solutes. Solutions of two different dyes are sepa-
rated by a membrane that is permeable to both. Each dye diffuses 
down its own concentration gradient. There will be a net diffusion 
of the purple dye toward the left, even though the total solute 
concentration was initially greater on the left side.
. Figure 8.11 Diffusion of solutes across a synthetic  
membrane. Each large arrow shows net diffusion of  
 dye molecules of that color.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Diffusion
Lower
concentration
of solute (sugar)
Sugar
molecule
Higher
concentration
of solute
Selectively
permeable
membrane
More similar
concentrations of solute
This side has
fewer solute 
molecules and 
more free water 
molecules.
Water molecules 
can pass through 
pores, but sugar 
molecules cannot.
Water molecules
cluster around 
sugar molecules.
This side has more 
solute molecules 
and fewer free 
water molecules.
Water moves from an area of 
higher to lower free water concentration        
(lower to higher solute concentration).
Osmosis
H2O
. Figure 8.12 Osmosis. Two sugar solutions of different 
concentrations are separated by a membrane that the solvent (water) 
can pass through but the solute (sugar) cannot. Water molecules 
move randomly and may cross in either direction, but overall, water 
diffuses from the solution with less concentrated solute to that with 
more concentrated solute. This passive transport of water, or osmosis, 
makes the sugar concentrations on both sides roughly equal.
VISUAL SKILLS If an orange dye capable of passing through the 
membrane was added to the left side of the tube above, how would 
it be distributed at the end of the experiment? (See Figure 8.11.) 
Would the final solution levels in the tube be affected? What cellular 
component does the membrane represent in this experiment?
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   203 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 205 ===

204 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
are bathed in an extracellular fluid that is isotonic to the cells. 
In hypertonic or hypotonic environments, however, organ-
isms that lack rigid cell walls must have other adaptations for 
osmoregulation, the control of solute concentrations and 
water balance. For example, the unicellular protist Paramecium 
caudatum lives in pond water, which is hypotonic to the cell. 
Paramecium has a plasma membrane that is much less perme-
able to water than the membranes of most other cells, but this 
only slows the uptake of water, which continually enters the 
cell. The reason the Paramecium cell doesn’t burst is that it has 
a contractile vacuole, an organelle that functions as a pump to 
force water out of the cell as fast as it enters by osmosis (Figure 
8.14). In contrast, the bacteria and archaea that live in hypersa-
line (excessively salty) environments (see Figure 27.1) have cel-
lular mechanisms that balance the internal and external solute 
concentrations to ensure that water does not move out of the 
cell. We’ll examine other evolutionary adaptations for osmo-
regulation by animals in Concept 44.1.
Water Balance of Cells with Cell Walls
The cells of plants, prokaryotes, fungi, and some protists are 
surrounded by cell walls (see Figure 7.27). When such a cell 
is immersed in a hypotonic solution—bathed in rainwater, 
for example—the cell wall helps maintain the cell’s water bal-
ance. Consider a plant cell. Like an animal cell, the plant cell 
swells as water enters by osmosis (Figure 8.13b). However, the 
relatively inelastic cell wall will expand only so much before 
it exerts a back pressure on the cell, called turgor pressure, that 
of the water unavailable to cross the membrane. As a result, 
the solution with a higher solute concentration has a lower 
free water concentration. Water diffuses across the membrane 
from the region of higher free water concentration (lower sol-
ute concentration) to that of lower free water concentration 
(higher solute concentration) until the solute concentrations 
on both sides of the membrane are more nearly equal. The 
diffusion of free water across a selectively permeable mem-
brane, whether artificial or cellular, is called osmosis. The 
movement of water across cell membranes and the balance 
of water between the cell and its environment are crucial to 
organisms. Let’s now apply what we’ve learned about osmosis 
in this system to living cells.
Water Balance of Cells Without Cell Walls
To explain the behavior of a cell in a solution, we must consider 
both solute concentration and membrane permeability. Both 
factors are taken into account in the concept of tonicity, the 
ability of a surrounding solution to cause a cell to gain or lose 
water. The tonicity of a solution depends in part on its concen-
tration of solutes that cannot cross the membrane (nonpene-
trating solutes) relative to that inside the cell. If there is a higher 
concentration of nonpenetrating solutes in the surrounding 
solution, water will tend to leave the cell, and vice versa.
If a cell without a cell wall, such as an animal cell, is immersed 
in an environment that is isotonic to the cell (iso means “same”), 
there will be no net movement of water across the plasma mem-
brane. Water diffuses across the membrane, but at the same rate 
in both directions. In an isotonic environ-
ment, the volume of an animal cell is stable 
(Figure 8.13a).
Let’s transfer the cell to a solution that 
is hypertonic to the cell (hyper means 
“more,” in this case referring to nonpenetrat-
ing solutes). The cell will lose water, shrivel, 
and probably die. This is why an increase 
in the salinity (saltiness) of a lake can kill 
the animals there; if the lake water becomes 
hypertonic to the animals’ cells, they might 
shrivel and die. However, taking up too 
much water can be just as hazardous to a 
cell as losing water. If we place the cell in a 
solution that is hypotonic to the cell (hypo 
means “less”), water will enter the cell faster 
than it leaves, and the cell will swell and lyse 
(burst) like an overfilled water balloon.
A cell without rigid cell walls can’t toler-
ate either excessive uptake or excessive loss 
of water. This problem of water balance is 
automatically solved if such a cell lives in 
isotonic surroundings. Seawater is isotonic 
to many marine invertebrates. The cells of 
most terrestrial (land-dwelling) animals 
? Why do limp celery stalks become crisp 
when placed in a glass of water?
 Mastering Biology Animation: Osmosis 
and Water Balance in Cells 
Video: Turgid Elodea 
Video: Plasmolysis in Elodea
(a) Animal cell. An
animal cell, such as 
this red blood cell, 
does not have a cell 
wall. Animal cells fare 
best in an isotonic
environment unless 
they have special 
adaptations that offset
the osmotic uptake or 
loss of water.
(b) Plant cell. Plant
cells are turgid (firm) 
and generally healthiest 
in a hypotonic environ-
ment, where the uptake 
of water is eventually
balanced by the wall
pushing back on 
the cell.
Isotonic solutionHypotonic solution
FlaccidTurgid (normal)
Hypertonic solution
Plasmolyzed
H2OCell wallPlasma
membrane Plasma
membraneH2O
H2O
H2O
NormalLysed Shriveled
H2O H2OH2O H2O
. Figure 8.13 The water balance of living cells. How living cells react to changes in the 
solute concentration of their environment depends on whether or not they have cell walls. 
(a) Animal cells, such as this red blood cell, do not have cell walls. (b) Plant cells do have cell 
walls. (Arrows indicate net water movement after the cells were first placed in these solutions.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   204 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 206 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 205
(b)
(a)A channel
protein has a 
channel through 
which water 
molecules or a 
specific solute 
can pass.
A carrier protein 
alternates 
between two 
shapes, moving 
a solute across 
the membrane 
during the 
shape change.
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOPLASM
Channel protein
Carrier
protein
Solute
Solute
. Figure 8.15 Two types of transport proteins that carry 
out facilitated diffusion. In both cases, the protein can transport 
the solute in either direction, but the net movement is down the 
concentration gradient of the solute.
 Mastering Biology Video: Paramecium Vacuole
Contractile vacuole 50 om
. Figure 8.14 The contractile vacuole of Paramecium. The 
vacuole collects fluid from canals in the cytoplasm. When full, the 
vacuole and canals contract, expelling fluid from the cell (LM).
 Mastering Biology Animation: Facilitated Diffusion
opposes further water uptake. At this point, the cell is turgid 
(very firm), which is the healthy state for most plant cells. 
Plants that are not woody, such as most houseplants, depend 
for mechanical support on cells kept turgid by a surrounding 
hypotonic solution. If a plant’s cells and surroundings are iso-
tonic, there is no net tendency for water to enter and the cells 
become flaccid (limp); the plant wilts.
However, a cell wall is of no advantage if the cell is 
immersed in a hypertonic environment. In this case, a plant 
cell, like an animal cell, will lose water to its surroundings and 
shrink. As the plant cell shrivels, its plasma membrane pulls 
away from the cell wall at multiple places. This phenomenon, 
called plasmolysis, causes the plant to wilt and can lead to 
plant death. The walled cells of bacteria and fungi also plas-
molyze in hypertonic environments.
Facilitated Diffusion: Passive Transport 
Aided by Proteins
Let’s look more closely at how water and certain hydrophilic 
 solutes cross a membrane. As mentioned earlier, many polar 
molecules and ions blocked by the lipid bilayer of the membrane 
diffuse passively with the help of transport proteins that span the 
membrane. This phenomenon is called facilitated diffusion. 
Cell biologists are still trying to learn exactly how various trans-
port proteins facilitate diffusion. Most transport proteins are very 
specific: They transport some substances but not others.
As mentioned earlier, the two types of transport proteins are 
channel proteins and carrier proteins. Channel proteins simply 
provide corridors that allow specific molecules or ions to cross 
the membrane (Figure 8.15a). The hydrophilic passageways pro-
vided by these proteins can allow water molecules or small ions to 
diffuse very quickly from one side of the membrane to the other. 
Aquaporins, the water channel proteins, facilitate the massive 
levels of diffusion of water (osmosis) that occur in plant cells and 
in animal cells such as red blood cells (see Figure 8.13). Certain 
kidney cells also have a high number of aquaporins, allowing 
them to reclaim water from urine before it is excreted. If the kid-
neys didn’t perform this function, you would excrete about 180 L 
of urine per day—and have to drink an equal volume of water!
Channel proteins that transport ions are called ion 
channels. Many ion channels function as gated channels, 
which open or close in response to a stimulus (see Figure 9.8). 
For some gated channels, the stimulus is electrical. In a nerve 
cell, for example, a potassium ion channel protein (see com-
puter model) opens in response 
to an electrical stimulus, allow-
ing a stream of potassium ions 
to leave the cell. This restores 
the cell’s ability to fire again. 
Other gated channels have a 
chemical stimulus: They open 
or close when a specific sub-
stance (not the one to be trans-
ported) binds to the channel. 
Ion channels are important 
in the functioning of the ner-
vous system, as you’ll learn 
in Chapter 48.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Elba Serrano: Investigating 
how ion channels enable you to hear
Carrier proteins, such as the glucose transporter men-
tioned earlier, seem to undergo a subtle change in shape 
that somehow translocates the solute-binding site across the 
membrane (Figure 8.15b). Such a change in shape may be 
triggered by the binding and release of the transported mole-
cule. Like ion channels, carrier proteins involved in facilitated 
diffusion result in the net movement of a substance down 
Potassium 
ion
. Potassium ion channel 
protein (See also the side view 
of a calcium channel protein in 
Figure 7.32a.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   205 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 207 ===

206 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Interpreting a Scatter Plot with Two Sets 
of Data
Is Glucose Uptake into Cells Affected by Age? Glucose, an 
important energy source for animals, is transported into cells by 
facilitated diffusion using protein carriers. In this exercise, you 
will interpret a graph with two sets of data from an experiment 
that examined glucose uptake over time in red blood cells from 
guinea pigs of different ages. You will determine if the cells’ rate 
of glucose uptake depended on the age of the guinea pig.
How the Experiment Was Done Researchers incubated guinea 
pig red blood cells in a 300 mM (millimolar) radioactive glucose 
solution at pH 7.4 at 25/uni00B0C. Every 10 or 15 minutes, they removed 
a sample of cells and measured the concentration of radioactive 
glucose inside those cells. The cells came from either a 15-day-old 
or a 1-month-old guinea pig.
Data from the Experiment When you have multiple sets of 
data, it can be useful to plot them on the same graph for com-
parison. In the graph here, each set of dots (of the same color) 
forms a scatter plot, in which every data point represents two 
numerical values, one for each variable. For each data set, a curve 
that best fits the points has been drawn to make it easier to see 
the trends. (For additional information about graphs, see the 
Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. First make sure you understand the parts of the graph. 
(a) Which variable is the independent variable—the variable 
controlled by the researchers? (b) Which variable is the depen-
dent variable—the variable that depended on the treatment 
and was measured by the researchers? (c) What do the red 
dots represent? (d) The blue dots?
2. From the data points on the graph, construct a table of the data. 
Put “Incubation Time (min)” in the left column of the table.
3. What does the graph show? Compare and contrast glucose uptake 
in red blood cells from 15-day-old and 1-month-old guinea pigs.
4. Develop a hypothesis to explain the difference between glucose 
uptake in red blood cells from 15-day-old and 1-month-old 
guinea pigs. (Think about how glucose gets into cells.)
5. Design an experiment to test your hypothesis.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Incubation time (min)
Concentration of
radioactive glucose (mM)
1-month-old 
guinea pig
15-day-old 
guinea pig
Data from T. Kondo and E. Beutler, Developmental changes in glucose transport 
of guinea pig erythrocytes, Journal of Clinical Investigation 65:1–4 (1980).
. Glucose Uptake over Time in Guinea Pig Red Blood Cells.
Active transport uses energy to 
move solutes against their gradients
Despite the help of transport proteins, facilitated diffusion 
is considered passive transport because the solute is moving 
down its concentration gradient, a process that requires no 
its concentration gradient. No energy input is thus required: 
This is passive transport. The Scientific Skills Exercise gives you 
an opportunity to work with data from an experiment related 
to glucose transport.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Passive Transport
CONCEPT CHECK 8.3
1. To manipulate yeast cells experimentally, their cell walls are 
sometimes digested. Which type of solution should be used 
to preserve the cells without cell walls? Explain.
2. WHAT IF? If a Paramecium swims from a hypotonic to an 
isotonic environment, will its contractile vacuole become 
more active or less? Why?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 8.4
energy. Facilitated diffusion speeds transport of a solute by 
providing efficient passage through the membrane, but it does 
not alter the direction of transport. Some other transport pro-
teins, however, can use energy to move solutes against their 
concentration gradients, across the plasma membrane from 
the side where they are less concentrated (whether inside or 
outside) to the side where they are more concentrated.
The Need for Energy in Active Transport
To pump a solute across a membrane against its gradient 
requires work; the cell must expend energy. Therefore, this 
type of membrane traffic is called active transport. The 
transport proteins that move solutes against their concentra-
tion gradients are all carrier proteins rather than channel pro-
teins. This makes sense because when channel proteins are 
open, they merely allow solutes to diffuse down their concen-
tration gradients rather than picking them up and transport-
ing them against their gradients.
Active transport enables a cell to maintain internal concen-
trations of small solutes that differ from concentrations in its 
environment. For example, compared with its surroundings, 
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   206 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 208 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 207
an animal cell has a much higher concentration of potassium 
ions (K+) and a much lower concentration of sodium ions 
(Na+). The plasma membrane helps maintain these steep gra-
dients by pumping Na+ out of the cell and K+ into the cell.
As in other types of cellular work, ATP hydrolysis supplies 
the energy for most active transport. One way ATP can power 
active transport is when its terminal phosphate group is trans-
ferred directly to the transport protein. This can induce the 
protein to change its shape in a manner that translocates a sol-
ute bound to the protein across the membrane. One transport 
system that works this way is the sodium-potassium pump, 
which exchanges Na+ for K+ across the plasma membrane of 
animal cells (Figure 8.16). The distinction between passive 
transport and active transport is reviewed in Figure 8.17.
How Ion Pumps Maintain Membrane 
Potential
All cells have voltages across their plasma membranes. 
Voltage is electrical potential energy (see Concept 2.2)—a 
separation of opposite charges. The cytoplasmic side of the 
membrane is negative in charge relative to the extracellular 
side because of an unequal distribution of anions and cations 
on the two sides. The voltage across a membrane, called a 
membrane potential, ranges from about -50 to  
-200 millivolts (mV). (The minus sign indicates that the 
inside of the cell is negative relative to the outside.)
Diffusion.
Hydrophobic
molecules and
(at a slow rate)
very small un-
charged polar
molecules can
diffuse through
the lipid bilayer.
Facilitated diffusion.
Many hydrophilic
substances diffuse
through membranes
with the assistance of
transport proteins,
either channel
proteins (left) or carrier
proteins (right).
Active transport.
Some transport proteins
expend energy and act 
as pumps, moving
substances across a
membrane against their
concentration (or elec-
trochemical) gradients.
Energy is usually supplied
by ATP hydrolysis.
ATP
Passive transport. Substances diffuse 
spontaneously down their concentration 
gradients, crossing a membrane with no 
expenditure of energy by the cell. The rate 
of diffusion can be greatly increased 
by transport proteins in the membrane.
. Figure 8.17 Review: passive 
and active transport.
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOPLASM
[Na+] high
[K+] low
[Na+] low
[K+] high
      Cytoplasmic Na+ binds to
the sodium-potassium pump 
with high affinity when
the protein has this shape.
1
Na+
Na+
Na+
      Phosphorylation leads to
a change in protein shape, 
reducing its affinity for Na+;
3 Na+ are released outside.
3
P
Na+
Na+ Na+
      Binding of 3 Na+ ions
stimulates phosphorylation 
by a kinase, using ATP .
2
P
Na+
Na+
Na+
ADP
ATP
      Loss of the phosphate
group restores the protein’s 
original shape, which has a 
lower affinity for K+.
5
K+
K+
      The new shape has a
high affinity for K+; 2 K+
bind on the extracellular side,
triggering release of the
phosphate group.
4
P
Pi
K+
K+
      2 K+ are released;
affinity for Na+ is
high again, and the
cycle repeats.
6
K+
K+
c Figure 8.16 The 
sodium-potassium 
pump: a specific case 
of active transport. 
This transport system 
pumps ions against steep 
concentration gradients. 
The pump oscillates 
between two shapes in a 
cycle that moves Na+ out 
of the cell (steps 1 – 3) 
and K+ into the cell (steps 
4 – 6). The two shapes 
have different binding 
affinities for Na+ and K+. 
ATP hydrolysis powers 
the shape change by 
transferring a phosphate 
group to the transport 
protein (phosphorylating 
the protein).
VISUAL SKILLS For each 
ion (Na+ and K+), describe 
its concentration inside the 
cell relative to outside. How 
many Na+ are moved out 
of the cell and how many 
K+ moved in per cycle?
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Active Transport
VISUAL SKILLS For each solute in the right panel, describe its  
direction of movement, and state whether it is moving with or  
against its concentration gradient.
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   207 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 209 ===

208 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
sodium-potassium pump appears to be the major electrogenic 
pump of animal cells. The main electrogenic pump of plants, 
fungi, and bacteria is a proton pump, which actively trans-
ports protons (hydrogen ions, H+) out of the cell. The pump-
ing of H+ transfers positive charge from the cytoplasm to the 
extracellular solution (Figure 8.18). By generating voltage 
across membranes, electrogenic pumps help store energy that 
can be tapped for cellular work. One important use of proton 
gradients in the cell is for ATP synthesis during cellular res-
piration, as you will see in Concept 10.4. Another is a type of 
membrane traffic called cotransport.
Cotransport: Coupled Transport  
by a Membrane Protein
A solute that exists in different concentrations across a mem-
brane can do work as it moves across that membrane by dif-
fusion down its concentration gradient. This is analogous 
to water that has been pumped uphill and performs work as 
it flows back down. In a mechanism called cotransport, a 
transport protein (a cotransporter) can couple the “down-
hill” diffusion of the solute to the “uphill” transport of a 
second substance against its own concentration gradient. 
For instance, a plant cell uses the gradient of H+ generated by 
its ATP-powered proton pumps to drive the active transport 
of amino acids, sugars, and several other nutrients into the 
cell. In the example shown in Figure 8.19, a cotransporter 
couples the return of H+ to the transport of sucrose into the 
cell. This protein can translocate sucrose into the cell against 
The membrane potential acts like a battery, an energy 
source that affects the traffic of all charged substances across 
the membrane. Because the inside of the cell is negative com-
pared with the outside, the membrane potential favors the 
passive transport of cations into the cell and anions out of the 
cell. Thus, two forces drive the diffusion of ions across a mem-
brane: a chemical force (the ion’s concentration gradient, 
which has been our sole consideration thus far in the chapter) 
and an electrical force (the effect of the membrane potential 
on the ion’s movement). This combination of forces acting 
on an ion is called the electrochemical gradient.
In the case of ions, then, we must refine our concept of pas-
sive transport: An ion diffuses not simply down its concentration 
gradient but, more exactly, down its electrochemical gradient. 
For example, the concentration of Na+ inside a resting nerve 
cell is much lower than outside it. When the cell is stimulated, 
gated channels open that facilitate Na+ diffusion. Sodium ions 
then “fall” down their electrochemical gradient, driven by the 
concentration gradient of Na+ and by the attraction of these 
cations to the negative side (inside) of the membrane. In this 
example, both electrical and chemical contributions to the 
electrochemical gradient act in the same direction across the 
membrane, but this is not always so. In cases where electrical 
forces due to the membrane potential oppose the simple diffu-
sion of an ion down its concentration gradient, active transport 
may be necessary. In Concepts 48.2 and 48.3, you’ll learn about 
the importance of electrochemical gradients and membrane 
potentials in the transmission of nerve impulses.
Some membrane proteins that actively transport ions con-
tribute to the membrane potential. Study Figure 8.16 to see if 
you can see why the sodium-potassium pump is a good exam-
ple. Notice that the pump does not translocate Na+ and K+ one 
for one, but pumps three sodium ions out of the cell for every 
two potassium ions it pumps into the cell. With each “crank” 
of the pump, there is a net transfer of one positive charge from 
the cytoplasm to the extracellular fluid, a process that stores 
energy as voltage. A transport protein that generates voltage 
across a membrane is called an electrogenic pump. The 
Proton pump
SucroseSucrose H+/sucrose
cotransporter Diffusion of H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+H+
H+
–
–
+
– +
– +
+
ATP
. Figure 8.19 Cotransport: active transport driven by a 
concentration gradient. A carrier protein, such as this H+/sucrose 
cotransporter in a plant cell (top), is able to use the diffusion of H+ 
down its electrochemical gradient into the cell to drive the uptake 
of sucrose. (The cell wall is not shown.) Although not technically 
part of the cotransport process, an ATP-driven proton pump is 
shown here (bottom), which concentrates H+ outside the cell. The 
resulting H+ gradient represents potential energy that can be used 
for active transport—of sucrose, in this case. Thus, ATP hydrolysis 
indirectly provides the energy necessary for cotransport.
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOPLASM
Proton pump
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
ATP
. Figure 8.18 A proton pump. Proton pumps are electrogenic 
pumps that store energy by generating voltage (charge separation) 
across membranes. A proton pump translocates positive charge 
in the form of hydrogen ions (H+, or protons). The voltage and H+ 
concentration gradient represent a dual energy source that can 
drive other processes, such as the uptake of nutrients. Most proton 
pumps are powered by ATP hydrolysis. (See Figure 7.32a.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   208 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 210 ===

 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 209
(Figure 8.20). A transport vesicle that has budded from the 
Golgi apparatus moves along a microtubule of the cytoskel-
eton to the plasma membrane. When the vesicle membrane 
and plasma membrane come into contact, specific proteins 
in both membranes rearrange the lipid molecules of the two 
bilayers so that the two membranes fuse. The contents of 
the vesicle spill out of the cell, and the vesicle membrane 
becomes part of the plasma membrane.
Many secretory cells use exocytosis to export products. For 
example, cells in the pancreas that make insulin secrete it into the 
extracellular fluid by exocytosis. In another example, nerve cells 
use exocytosis to release neurotransmitters that signal other neu-
rons or muscle cells (see Figure 8.1). When plant cells are making 
cell walls, exocytosis delivers some of the necessary proteins and 
carbohydrates from Golgi vesicles to the outside of the cell.
Endocytosis
In endocytosis, the cell takes in molecules and particulate 
matter by forming new vesicles from the plasma membrane. 
Although the proteins involved in the processes are different, 
the events of endocytosis look like the reverse of exocytosis. 
First, a small area of the plasma membrane sinks inward to 
form a pocket. Then, as the pocket deepens, it pinches in, 
forming a vesicle containing material that had been outside 
the cell. Study Figure 8.21 carefully to understand the three 
types of endocytosis: phagocytosis (“cellular eating”), pinocy-
tosis (“cellular drinking”), and receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Human cells use receptor-mediated endocytosis to take in 
cholesterol for membrane synthesis and the synthesis of other 
steroids. Cholesterol travels in the blood in particles called 
low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), each a complex of lipids and 
a protein. LDLs bind to LDL receptors on plasma membranes 
and then enter the cells by endocytosis. In the inherited dis-
ease familial hypercholesterolemia, characterized by a very 
high level of cholesterol in the blood, LDLs cannot enter cells 
because the LDL receptor proteins are defective or missing. 
Cholesterol thus accumulates in the blood, contributing to 
its concentration gradient, but only if the sucrose molecule 
travels in the company of an H+. The H+ uses the transport 
protein as an avenue to diffuse down its own electrochemical 
gradient, which is maintained by the proton pump. Plants use 
H+/sucrose cotransport to load sucrose produced by photo-
synthesis into cells in the veins of leaves. The vascular tissue 
of the plant can then distribute the sugar to roots and other 
nonphotosynthetic organs that do not make their own sugars.
A similar cotransporter in animals transports Na+ into 
intestinal cells together with glucose, which is moving down 
its concentration gradient into the cell. (The Na+ is then 
pumped out of the cell into the blood on the other side by 
Na+/K+ pumps; see Figure 8.16.) Our understanding of Na+/
glucose cotransporters has helped us find more effective treat-
ments for diarrhea, a serious problem in developing countries. 
Normally, sodium in waste is reabsorbed in the colon, main-
taining constant levels in the body, but diarrhea expels waste 
so rapidly that reabsorption is not possible, and sodium levels 
fall precipitously. To treat this life-threatening condition, 
patients are given a solution to drink containing high concen-
trations of salt (NaCl) and glucose. The solutes are taken up by 
Na+/glucose cotransporters on the surface of intestinal cells 
and passed through the cells into the blood. This simple treat-
ment has lowered infant mortality worldwide.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Active Transport
CONCEPT CHECK 8.4
1. Na+>K+ pumps help nerve cells establish a voltage across 
their plasma membranes. Do these pumps use ATP or pro-
duce ATP? Explain.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Compare the Na+>K+ pump in Figure 8.16 
with the cotransporter in Figure 8.19. Explain why the 
Na+>K+ pump would not be considered a cotransporter.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the characteristics of the 
lysosome in Concept 7.4. Given the internal environment of 
a lysosome, what transport protein might you expect to see 
in its membrane?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 8.5
Bulk transport across the plasma 
membrane occurs by exocytosis 
and endocytosis
Large molecules, such as proteins and polysaccharides, 
generally don’t cross the membrane by diffusion or transport 
proteins. Instead, they usually enter and leave the cell in bulk, 
packaged in vesicles.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Exocytosis and Endocytosis
Plasma membrane
Micro-
tubule
Golgi
apparatus
      A vesicle containing secretory proteins buds off from the Golgi.
      The vesicle travels 
along a microtubule to 
the plasma membrane.
1
      The vesicle membrane becomes part of the plasma membrane.5
2
      The outside of the 
vesicle binds to the 
inside of the plasma 
membrane.
3
      The two membranes 
fuse, releasing (secreting) 
the proteins outside 
the cell.
4
. Figure 8.20 Exocytosis.
Exocytosis
The cell secretes certain molecules by the fusion of vesicles 
with the plasma membrane; this process is called exocytosis 
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   209 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 211 ===

210 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
. Figure 8.21 Exploring Endocytosis in Animal Cells
Phagocytosis Pinocytosis Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis
Plasma
membrane
Coat 
protein
0.25 om
Pseudopodium
Food or
other particle
Food
vacuole
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOPLASM
Solutes
Solutes
Coated
vesicle
Coated
pit
Coat protein
Plasma
membrane
Receptor
0.25 om
Pseudopodium of amoeba
Green algal cell
5 om
In phagocytosis, a cell engulfs a particle 
by extending pseudopodia (singular, 
pseudopodium) around it and packaging 
it within a membranous sac called a food 
vacuole. The particle will be digested after the 
food vacuole fuses with a lysosome containing 
hydrolytic enzymes (see Figure 7.13a).  
An amoeba engulﬁng a green algal cell 
via phagocytosis (TEM).
Pinocytotic vesicles forming (TEMs).
Top: A coated pit. Bottom: A coated vesicle 
forming during receptor-mediated 
endocytosis (TEMs).
In pinocytosis, a cell continually “gulps” 
droplets of extracellular ﬂuid into tiny 
vesicles, formed by infoldings of the plasma 
membrane. In this way, the cell obtains 
molecules dissolved in the droplets. Because 
any and all solutes are taken into the cell, 
pinocytosis as shown here is nonspeciﬁc for 
the substances it transports. In many cases,  
the parts of the plasma membrane that form 
vesicles are lined on their cytoplasmic side by 
a fuzzy layer of coat protein; the “pits” and 
resulting vesicles are called coated pits.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is a 
specialized type of pinocytosis that enables 
the cell to acquire bulk quantities of speciﬁc 
substances, even though those substances 
may not be very concentrated in the 
extracellular ﬂuid. Embedded in the plasma 
membrane are proteins with receptor sites 
exposed to the extracellular ﬂuid. Speciﬁc 
solutes bind to the receptors. The receptor 
proteins then cluster in coated pits, and 
each coated pit forms a vesicle containing 
the bound molecules. The diagram shows 
only bound molecules (purple triangles) inside 
the vesicle, but other molecules from the 
extracellular ﬂuid are also present.  After the 
ingested material is liberated  from the 
vesicle, the emptied receptors are recycled
to the plasma membrane by the  same vesicle 
(not shown).
Coated vesicle 
with speciƂc 
solutes (purple) 
bound to 
receptors (red)
VISUAL SKILLS Use the scale bars to estimate the diameters of (a) the food vacuole that 
will form around the algal cell (left micrograph; measure the length, not the width) and 
(b) the coated vesicle (lower right micrograph). (c) Which is larger, and by what factor?
 Mastering Biology Animation: Exocytosis and Endocytosis
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   210 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 212 ===

early atherosclerosis, the buildup of lipids within blood vessel 
walls. This narrows the space in the vessels and impedes blood 
flow, potentially resulting in heart damage and stroke.
Endocytosis and exocytosis also provide mechanisms for 
rejuvenating or remodeling the plasma membrane. These 
processes occur continually in most eukaryotic cells, yet the 
amount of plasma membrane in a nongrowing cell remains 
fairly constant. The addition of membrane by one process 
appears to offset the loss of membrane by the other.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Membrane Transport
CONCEPT CHECK 8.5
1. As a cell grows, its plasma membrane expands. Does this 
involve endocytosis or exocytosis? Explain.
2. DRAW IT Return to Figure 8.9, and circle a patch of 
plasma membrane that is coming from a vesicle involved 
in exocytosis.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS In Concept 7.7, you learned that 
animal cells make an extracellular matrix (ECM). Describe 
the cellular pathway of synthesis and deposition of an ECM 
glycoprotein.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
8 Chapter Review   G o  t o  Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 8.1
Cellular membranes are fluid mosaics of lipids  
and proteins (pp. 197–201)
• In the fluid mosaic model, amphipathic proteins are embed-
ded in the phospholipid bilayer.
• Phospholipids and some proteins move sideways within the mem-
brane. The unsaturated hydrocarbon tails of some phospholipids 
keep membranes fluid at lower temperatures, while cholesterol helps 
membranes resist changes in fluidity caused by temperature changes.
• Membrane proteins function in transport, enzymatic activity, sig-
nal transduction, cell-cell recognition, intercellular joining, and 
attachment to the cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix. Short 
chains of sugars linked to proteins (in glycoproteins) and lipids 
(in glycolipids) on the exterior side of the plasma membrane 
interact with surface molecules of other cells.
• Membrane proteins and lipids are synthesized in the ER and mod-
ified in the ER and Golgi apparatus. The inside and outside faces 
of membranes differ in molecular composition.
? In what ways are membranes crucial to life?
CONCEPT 8.2
Membrane structure results in selective permeability 
(pp. 201–202)
• A cell must exchange molecules and ions with its surroundings, a 
process controlled by the selective permeability of the plasma 
membrane. Hydrophobic substances are soluble in lipids and pass 
through membranes rapidly, whereas polar molecules and ions 
generally require specific transport proteins.
? How do aquaporins affect the permeability of a membrane?
of nonpenetrating solutes (hypertonic); water enters if the 
solution has a lower solute concentration (hypotonic). If the 
concentrations are equal (isotonic), no net osmosis occurs. Cell 
survival depends on balancing water uptake and loss.
• In facilitated 
diffusion, a transport 
protein speeds water 
or solute movement 
down its concentra-
tion gradient across 
a membrane. Ion 
channels facilitate 
the diffusion of ions 
across a membrane. 
Carrier proteins can 
undergo changes in 
shape that translocate 
bound solutes across 
the membrane.
? What happens to a cell placed in a hypertonic solution? Describe the 
free water concentration inside and out.
CONCEPT 8.3
Passive transport is diffusion of a substance across  
a membrane with no energy investment (pp. 202–206)
• Diffusion is the spontaneous movement of a substance down 
its concentration gradient. Water diffuses out of a cell 
(osmosis) if the solution outside has a higher concentration 
Carrier
protein
Channel
protein
Facilitated diffusion
CONCEPT 8.4
Active transport uses energy to move solutes  
against their gradients  
(pp. 206–209)
• Specific membrane proteins use energy, 
usually in the form of ATP , to do the work 
of active transport.
• Ions can have both a concentration 
(chemical) gradient and an electri-
cal gradient (voltage). These gradients 
combine in the electrochemical 
gradient, which determines the net 
direction of ionic diffusion.
• Cotransport of two solutes occurs 
when a membrane protein enables 
the “downhill” diffusion of one solute 
to drive the “uphill” transport of the  
other.
? ATP is not directly involved in the functioning of a cotransporter. 
Why, then, is cotransport considered active transport?
Active transport
ATP
 CHAPTER 8  Cell Membranes 211
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   211 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 213 ===

what water regulation adaptations might have evolved in 
protists in hypertonic habitats such as the Great Salt Lake and 
in habitats with changing salt concentration.
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY An experiment is designed to study the 
mechanism of sucrose uptake by plant cells. Cells are immersed 
in a sucrose solution, and the pH of the solution is monitored. 
Samples of the cells are taken at intervals, and their sucrose 
concentration is measured. The pH is observed to decrease until 
it reaches a steady, slightly acidic level, and then sucrose uptake 
begins. (a) Evaluate these results and propose a hypothesis to 
explain them. (b) Predict what would happen if an inhibitor of 
ATP regeneration by the cell were added to the beaker once the 
pH was at a steady level. Explain.
9. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY Extensive 
irrigation in arid regions causes salts to accumulate in the soil. 
(When water evaporates, salts that were dissolved in the water 
are left behind in the soil.) Based on what you learned about 
water balance in plant cells, explain why increased soil salinity 
(saltiness) might be harmful to crops.
10. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS A human 
pancreatic cell obtains O2—and necessary molecules such as 
glucose, amino acids, and cholesterol—from its environment, 
and it releases CO2 as a waste product. In response to hormonal 
signals, the cell secretes digestive enzymes. It also regulates its 
ion concentrations by exchange with its environment. Based 
on what you have just learned about the structure and function 
of cellular membranes, write a short essay (100–150 words) to 
describe how such a cell accomplishes these interactions with 
its environment.
11. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
In the supermarket, 
lettuce and other 
produce are often 
sprayed with water. 
Explain why this 
makes vegetables 
crisp.
CONCEPT 8.5
Bulk transport across the plasma membrane occurs  
by exocytosis and endocytosis (pp. 209–211)
• In exocytosis, transport vesicles migrate to the plasma membrane, 
fuse with it, and release their contents. In endocytosis, molecules 
enter cells within vesicles that pinch inward from the plasma 
membrane. The three types of endocytosis are phagocytosis, 
pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis.
? Which type of endocytosis involves the binding of specific substances 
in the extracellular fluid to membrane proteins? What does this type of 
transport enable a cell to do?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. DRAW IT An artificial “cell” consisting of an aqueous solution 
enclosed in a selectively permeable membrane is immersed in 
a beaker containing a different solution, the “environment,” 
as shown in the accompanying diagram. The membrane 
is permeable to water and to the simple sugars glucose and 
fructose but impermeable to the disaccharide sucrose.
(a) Draw solid arrows to indicate the net movement of solutes 
into and/or out of the cell.
(b) Is the solution outside the cell isotonic, hypotonic, or hypertonic?
(c) Draw a dashed 
arrow to show 
the net osmo-
sis, if any.
(d) Will the ar-
tificial cell 
become more 
flaccid, more 
turgid, or stay 
the same?
(e) Eventually, will 
the two solu-
tions have the 
same or different solute concentrations?
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Paramecium and other protists 
that live in hypotonic environments have cell membranes that 
limit water uptake, while those living in isotonic environments 
have membranes that are more permeable to water. Describe 
0.03 M sucrose
0.02 M glucose
“Cell” “Environment”
0.01 M sucrose
0.01 M glucose
0.01 M fructose
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
212 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   212 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 214 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C08_PRF.indd   213 3/14/20   1:56 AM

=== SIDE 215 ===

Figure 9.1 This impala is fleeing for its life, racing to escape the predatory cheetah 
nipping at its heels. The impala is breathing rapidly, its heart pounding and its legs 
pumping furiously. These physiological functions are all part of the impala’s “fight-
or-flight” response, driven by hormones released from its adrenal glands at times of 
stress—in this case, upon sensing the cheetah.
Cellular Signaling9
Signal reception
An epinephrine molecule 
binds to a receptor on a 
muscle cell.
The impala
senses a cheetah.
Its brain signals the
adrenal glands to
release epinephrine
into the blood.
activates activates
Epinephrine
Receptor
Pathway of relay molecules Enzyme
Muscle cell in leg
Glycogen
Glucose
How does cell signaling fuel the
desperate ﬂight of an impala?
Signal transduction 
Relay molecules transmit 
the signal, ultimately 
activating an enzyme.
Cellular response
The enzyme breaks down 
glycogen, releasing glucose 
that fuels the leg muscles. Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 9
• Animation: Overview of Cell Signaling
• Animation: Signal Transduction Pathways
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Problem-Solving Exercise: Can a Skin 
Wound Turn Deadly?
• Tutorial: Cell-Signaling: Transduction 
and Response
Study Tip
Make a table: As you read about 
examples of cell signaling in this chapter, 
make a table and classify the events of 
each example into three stages: signal 
reception, signal transduction, and 
cellular response.
9.1  External signals are converted to 
responses within the cell p. 215
9.2  Signal reception: A signaling 
molecule binds to a receptor, 
causing it to change shape p. 219
9.3  Signal transduction: Cascades of 
molecular interactions transmit 
signals from receptors to relay 
molecules in the cell p. 223
9.4  Cellular response: Cell signaling 
leads to regulation of transcription 
or cytoplasmic activities p. 228
9.5  Apoptosis requires integration  
of multiple cell-signaling 
pathways p. 231
KEY CONCEPTS
Example
of Cell
Signaling
Signal
Reception
Signal
Trans-
duction
Cellular
Response
Epinephrine Relay 
molecules 
each 
activate 
the next 
molecule.
Epinephrine
binds cell-
surface
receptor.
An enzyme is 
activated that 
breaks down 
glycogen into 
glucose for 
energy to ﬁght 
or ﬂee.
214
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   214 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 216 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 215
cells have reached a certain density. The biofilm protects the 
cells in it, and they often derive nutrition from the surface they 
are on. Biofilms are believed to be involved in up to 80% of all 
human bacterial infections. You have probably encountered 
biofilms many times, perhaps without realizing it. The slimy 
coating on a fallen log or on leaves lying on a forest path, and 
even the film on your teeth each morning, are examples of 
bacterial biofilms. In fact, tooth-brushing and flossing disrupt 
biofilms that would otherwise cause cavities and gum disease.
Another example of bacterial behavior coordinated by 
quorum sensing is the secretion of toxins by infectious bac-
teria, which has serious medical implications. Sometimes 
treatment by antibiotics doesn’t work with such infec-
tions because of antibiotic resistance that has evolved in a 
particular strain of bacteria. A promising alternative treat-
ment would be to disrupt toxin production by interfering 
with the signaling pathways used in quorum sensing. In the 
Problem-Solving Exercise, you can participate in the process 
of scientific thinking involved in this novel approach.
Now let’s look at an example of cell signaling in yeasts 
(single-celled fungi). Cells of the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae—which are used to make bread, wine, and beer—
identify their sexual mates by chemical signaling when they 
reproduce sexually. There are two sexes, or mating types, 
called a and a (Figure 9.3). Each type secretes a specific 
CONCEPT 9.1
External signals are converted  
to responses within the cell
Scientists think that signaling mechanisms first evolved hun-
dreds of millions of years ago in ancient prokaryotes and single-
celled eukaryotes and then were adapted for new uses in their 
multicellular descendants. So let’s begin by considering signaling 
in some examples of single-celled organisms: bacteria and yeasts.
Evolution of Cell Signaling
EVOLUTION Research during the 1970s suggested that bacte-
rial cells—somewhat surprisingly, since they are single-celled 
organisms—were capable of signaling to each other. Since then, 
we have come to understand that cell signaling is critical among 
prokaryotes. Bacterial cells secrete molecules that can be detected 
by other bacterial cells (Figure 9.2). Sensing the concentration of 
such signaling molecules allows bacteria to monitor their own 
local cell density, a phenomenon called quorum sensing.
Quorum sensing allows bacterial populations to coordinate 
the behavior of all cells in a population in activities that require 
a given density of cells acting at the same time. One example is 
formation of a biofilm, an aggregation of bacterial cells attached 
to a surface by molecules secreted by the cells, but only after the 
Individual rod-shaped 
cells
1
Fruiting bodies
Spore-forming 
structure
(fruiting body)
3
Aggregation in progress2
0.5 mm
2.5 mm
. Figure 9.2 Communication among bacteria. Soil-dwelling 
bacteria called myxobacteria (“slime bacteria”) use chemical signals 
to share information about nutrient availability. When food is 
scarce, starving cells secrete a signaling molecule that stimulates 
neighboring cells to aggregate. The cells form a structure called 
a fruiting body that produces 
spores, thick-walled cells that can 
survive until the environment 
improves. The myxobacteria 
shown here are the species 
Myxococcus xanthus (steps 1–3, 
SEMs; lower photo, LM).
 a
1
2
3
Exchange of 
mating factors. 
Each mating cell 
type secretes a 
mating factor 
that binds to 
receptors on the 
other mating type.
c
c
a/c
Yeast cell,
mating type a
a factor
c factorReceptor
Yeast cell,
mating type c
Mating. Binding of 
the factors to receptors 
induces changes in 
the cells that lead to 
their fusion.
a
New a/c cell. The 
nucleus of the fused cell 
includes all the genes 
from the a and c cells. 
. Figure 9.3 Communication between mating yeast cells. 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells use chemical signaling to identify 
cells of the opposite mating type and initiate the mating process. 
The two mating types and their corresponding chemical signaling 
molecules, or mating factors, are called a and a.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   215 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 217 ===

216 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Cells sense their own population density by quorum sensing, and at a certain density 
they start to secrete toxin. In this exercise, you will analyze whether blocking quo-
rum sensing can stop S. aureus from producing toxin.
Your Approach In S. aureus, quorum sensing involves two separate signal trans-
duction pathways. Two candidate synthetic peptides (short proteins), called peptides 
1 and 2, have been proposed to interfere with S. aureus quorum-sensing pathways. 
Your job is to test each potential inhibitor of quorum sensing to see if it blocks either 
or both of the pathways that lead to toxin production.
For your experiment, you grow four cultures of S. aureus to a standardized high 
density and measure the concentration of toxin in the culture. The control culture 
contains no peptide. The other cultures have one or both candidate inhibitory 
peptides mixed into the growth medium before starting the cultures.
Your Data
Concentration of toxin in culture
(Şmoles/mL)
 
0
2.5
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Control Peptide 1 Peptide 2 Peptides 1 + 2
Data from N. Balaban et al., Treatment of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm infection by the quorum-
sensing inhibitor RIP, Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 51(6):2226–2229 (2007).
Your Analysis
1. Rank the cultures according to toxin production, from most to least.
2. Which, if any, of the cultures with peptide(s) resulted in a toxin concentration 
similar to the control culture? What is your evidence for this?
3. Was there an additive effect on toxin production when peptides 1 and 2 were 
both present in the growth medium? What is your evidence for this?
4. Based on these data, would you hypothesize that peptides 1 and 2 act on the 
same quorum-sensing pathway leading to toxin production or on two different 
pathways? What is your reasoning?
5. Do these data suggest a possible treatment for antibiotic-resistant S. aureus 
infections? What else would you want to know to investigate this further?
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Can a skin wound turn deadly?
 Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving 
Exercise can be assigned in Mastering Biology. 
Or a more extensive investigation called “Solve It: 
Is It Possible to Treat Bacterial Infections Without 
Traditional Antibiotics?” can be assigned.
factor that binds only to receptors on the other type of cell. 
When exposed to each other’s mating factors, a pair of cells 
of opposite type change shape, grow toward each other, and 
fuse (mate). The new a/a cell contains all the genes of both 
original cells, providing advantages to the cell’s descendants, 
which arise by subsequent cell divisions.
The unique match between mating factor and receptor is 
key to ensuring mating only between cells of the same spe-
cies of yeast. How does the binding of a mating factor by the 
yeast cell-surface receptor initiate a signal that brings about 
the cellular response of mating? This occurs in a series of 
three major steps—signal reception, signal transduction, and 
cellular response—called a signal transduction pathway. Many 
such pathways exist in the cells of both unicellular and mul-
ticellular organisms. In fact, the molecular details of signal 
transduction in yeasts and mammals are strikingly similar, 
even though it’s been over a billion years since they shared a 
common ancestor. This similarity suggests that early versions 
of cell-signaling mechanisms evolved well before the first 
multicellular organisms appeared on Earth.
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is a common 
bacterial species found on the surface of 
healthy skin that can turn into a serious 
pathogen if introduced into tissue through a 
cut or abrasion. Once S. aureus cells enter the 
body and reach a certain density, they secrete 
a toxin that kills body cells and contributes 
significantly to inflammation and damage. 
Because about one in 100 people carry a strain 
of S. aureus that is resistant to common antibi-
otics, a minor infection can turn permanently 
harmful or even deadly.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   216 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 218 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 217
Local and Long-Distance Signaling
Like bacteria or yeast cells, cells in a multicellular organism 
communicate by way of a signaling molecules targeted for 
cells that may or may not be immediately adjacent. As we saw 
in Concepts 7.7 and 8.1, eukaryotic cells may communicate 
by direct contact, which is one type of local signaling. Many 
animal and plant cells have cell junctions that directly con-
nect the cytoplasms of adjacent cells (Figure 9.4a). In these 
cases, signaling substances dissolved in the cytosol can pass 
between neighboring cells. Moreover, some animal cells 
may communicate by direct contact between cell-surface 
molecules, as shown in Figure 9.4b. This type of local sig-
naling is especially important in embryonic development, 
the immune response, and in maintaining adult stem cell 
populations.
In many other cases of local signaling, signaling molecules 
are secreted by the signaling cell. Some molecules travel only 
short distances; such local regulators influence cells that 
are nearby. This type of local signaling in animals is called 
paracrine signaling (Figure 9.5a). One class of local regulators 
in animals, growth factors, consists of compounds that stimu-
late nearby target cells to grow and divide. Numerous cells 
can simultaneously receive and respond to the growth factors 
produced by a single cell in their vicinity.
A highly specialized type of local signaling called synaptic 
signaling occurs in the animal nervous system Figure 9.5b; see 
Concept 48.4. An electrical signal along a nerve cell triggers 
the secretion of neurotransmitter molecules. These molecules 
act as chemical signals, diffusing across the synapse—the 
narrow space between the nerve cell and its target cell—trig-
gering a response in the target cell. Drugs to treat depression, 
Hormones
travel in
bloodstream.
Blood
vessel
Endocrine cell Target cell
specifically
binds
hormones.
Local signaling: up to a few cells‘ distance Long-distance signaling: up to body-length distance
(a) (b)Paracrine signaling. A 
signaling cell acts on nearby 
target cells by secreting
molecules of a local regulator 
(a growth factor, for example).
Synaptic signaling. A nerve 
cell releases neurotransmitter 
molecules into a synapse, stim-
ulating the target cell, such as 
a muscle or another nerve cell.
(c)Endocrine (hormonal) signaling. Specialized endocrine cells 
secrete hormones into body fluids, often blood. Hormones reach 
most body cells, but are bound by and affect only some cells.
Electrical signal triggers release
of neurotransmitter molecules.
Target cell
Neurotransmitters
diffuse across
synapse.
Target cells
Signaling
cell
Secretory
vesicles
Local regulator
. Figure 9.5 Local and long-distance cell signaling by secreted molecules in animals. In both local and 
long-distance signaling, only specific target cells that can recognize a given signaling molecule will respond to it.
Plasma membranes Cell wall
Gap junctions
between animal cells
Plasmodesmata
between plant cells
(a)
(b)
Cell junctions. Both animals and plants have cell junctions that
allow molecules, including signaling molecules, to pass readily 
between adjacent cells without crossing plasma membranes.
Cell-surface molecules.  In many animal cells, cell-surface 
molecules on adjacent cells interact with each other, resulting in 
a signal passing between the cells.
. Figure 9.4 Communication requiring contact between cells.
anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) affect this 
signaling process.
Both animals and plants use molecules called hormones 
for long-distance signaling. In hormonal signaling in ani-
mals, also known as endocrine signaling, specialized cells 
release hormones, which travel through the circulatory sys-
tem to other parts of the body, where they reach target cells 
that can recognize and respond to them (Figure 9.5c). Many 
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   217 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 219 ===

218 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
plant hormones reach distant targets by traveling through 
cells (see Concept 39.2). Like local regulators, plant hormones 
vary widely in size and type. For instance, the plant hormone 
ethylene, which promotes fruit ripening and helps regulate 
growth, is a hydrocarbon of only six atoms (C2H4), small 
enough to diffuse through the air and pass through cell walls. 
(Small signaling molecules probably evolved early on among 
single-celled organisms.) In contrast, the mammalian hor-
mone insulin, which regulates sugar levels in the blood, is a 
protein with thousands of atoms.
What happens when a potential target cell is exposed to a 
secreted signaling molecule? The ability of a cell to respond 
is determined by whether it has a specific receptor molecule 
that can bind to the signaling molecule. The information con-
veyed by this binding, the signal, must then be changed into 
another form—transduced—inside the cell before the cell can 
respond. The remainder of the chapter discusses this process, 
primarily as it occurs in animal cells. (Two signaling pathway 
proteins are shown in their cellular context in Figure 7.32a.)
The Three Stages of Cell Signaling: A Preview
Our current understanding of how signaling molecules act 
through signal transduction pathways had its origins in the 
pioneering work of Earl W. Sutherland, whose research led 
to a Nobel Prize in 1971. Sutherland and his colleagues at 
Vanderbilt University were investigating how the animal hor-
mone epinephrine (also called adrenaline) triggers the “fight-
or-flight” response in animals like the impala in Figure 9.1. 
One effect of epinephrine is to mobilize fuel reserves, which 
can be used by the animal to either defend itself (fight) or try 
to escape (flight). Epinephrine stimulates the breakdown of 
the storage polysaccharide glycogen within liver cells and 
skeletal muscle cells. The breakdown of glycogen releases the 
sugar glucose 1-phosphate, which the cell converts to glucose 
6-phosphate. The liver or muscle cell can then use this com-
pound, an early intermediate in glycolysis, for energy produc-
tion (see Figure 10.8). Alternatively, the compound can be 
stripped of phosphate and released from the liver cell into the 
blood as glucose, which can fuel cells throughout the body.
But how, exactly, does epinephrine mobilize glucose for 
use? Sutherland’s research team discovered that epineph-
rine outside the cell stimulates glycogen breakdown by 
somehow activating an enzyme, glycogen phosphorylase, 
inside the cell. However, when epinephrine was added to a 
solution containing the enzyme and its substrate, glycogen, 
no breakdown occurred. Glycogen phosphorylase could 
be activated by epinephrine only when the hormone was 
added to intact cells. This result told Sutherland two things. 
First, epinephrine does not interact directly with the enzyme 
responsible for glycogen breakdown; an intermediate step or 
series of steps must be occurring in the cell. Second, an intact, 
membrane-bound cell must be present for transmission of the 
signal to take place.
Sutherland’s work suggested that the process going on at 
the receiving end of a cellular communication can be dis-
sected into three stages: signal reception, signal transduction, 
and cellular response (Figure 9.6):
1  Signal reception. Reception is the target cell’s detection 
of a signaling molecule coming from outside the cell. A 
chemical signal is “detected” when the signaling molecule 
binds to a receptor protein located at the cell’s surface (or 
inside the cell, to be discussed later).
2  Signal transduction. The binding of the signaling mol-
ecule changes the receptor protein in some way, initiating 
the process of transduction. The transduction stage converts 
the signal to a form that can bring about a specific cellular 
response. In Sutherland’s system, the binding of epineph-
rine to a receptor protein in a liver cell’s plasma membrane 
leads to activation of glycogen phosphorylase in the cytosol. 
Transduction sometimes occurs in a single step but more 
often requires a sequence of changes in a series of different 
molecules—a signal transduction pathway. The mol-
ecules in the pathway are often called relay molecules; three 
are shown as an example.
Three relay molecules in a signal transduction pathway 
Activation
of cellular
response, 
such as 
release of 
glucose from 
glycogen
Signal transduction Cellular responseSignal reception
Signaling 
molecule
Plasma membrane
CYTOPLASMEXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
Receptor
1 2 3
1 2 3
c Figure 9.6 Overview of cell 
signaling. From the perspective of the 
cell receiving the message, cell signaling 
can be divided into three stages: signal 
reception, signal transduction, and cellular 
response. When reception occurs at the 
plasma membrane, as shown here, the 
transduction stage is usually a pathway 
of several steps (three are shown as an 
example), with each specific relay molecule 
in the pathway bringing about a change 
in the next molecule. The final molecule in 
the pathway triggers the cell’s response.
VISUAL SKILLS Where would the 
epinephrine in Sutherland’s experiment fit 
into this diagram of cell signaling?
 Mastering Biology Animation: Overview of Cell Signaling
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   218 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 220 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 219
Receptors in the Plasma Membrane
Cell-surface transmembrane receptors play crucial roles in the 
biological systems of animals. The largest family of human 
cell-surface receptors is that of the G protein-coupled recep-
tors (GPCRs). There are more than 800 GPCRs; an example 
is shown in Figure 9.7. Another example is the co-receptor 
hijacked by HIV to enter immune cells (see Figure 8.8); this 
GPCR is the target of the drug maraviroc, which has shown 
some success at treating AIDS.
Most water-soluble signaling molecules bind to specific 
sites on transmembrane receptor proteins that transmit infor-
mation from the extracellular environment to the inside of 
the cell. We can see how cell-surface transmembrane recep-
tors work by looking at three major types: G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs), receptor tyrosine kinases, and ion chan-
nel receptors. These receptors are discussed and illustrated in 
Figure 9.8; study this figure before going on.
Given the many important functions of cell-surface recep-
tors, it is not surprising that their malfunctions are associated 
with many human diseases, including cancer, heart disease, 
and asthma. To better understand and treat these conditions, 
a major focus of both university research teams and the phar-
maceutical industry has been to analyze the structure of these 
receptors.
Although cell-surface receptors (half of which are GPCRs) 
represent 30% of all human proteins, determining their 
structures by X-ray crystallography (see Figure 5.21) has 
proved challenging. For one thing, cell-surface receptors 
tend to be flexible and inherently unstable, thus difficult to 
crystallize. It took years of persistent efforts for researchers to 
determine the first few of these structures, such as the GPCR 
3  Cellular response. The transduced signal finally triggers 
a specific cellular response. The response may be almost 
any imaginable cellular activity—such as catalysis by an 
enzyme (for example, glycogen phosphorylase), rearrange-
ment of the cytoskeleton, or activation of specific genes in 
the nucleus. The cell-signaling process helps ensure that 
crucial activities like these occur in the right cells, at the 
right time, and in proper coordination with the activi-
ties of other cells of the organism. We’ll now explore the 
mechanisms of cell signaling in more detail, including a 
discussion of regulation and termination of the process.
CONCEPT CHECK 9.1
1. Explain how signaling is involved in ensuring that yeast cells 
fuse only with cells of the opposite mating type.
2. How do distantly placed cells in a multicellular organism 
communicate?
3. WHAT IF? If epinephrine were mixed with glycogen phos-
phorylase and glycogen in a cell-free mixture in a test tube, 
would glucose 1-phosphate be generated? Why or why not?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 9.2
Signal reception: A signaling 
molecule binds to a receptor, 
causing it to change shape
A wireless router may broadcast its network signal indiscrimi-
nately, but only computers with the correct password can 
connect to it: Reception of the signal depends on the receiver. 
Similarly, the signals emitted by an a mating type yeast cell 
are “heard” only by its prospective mates, a cells. In the case 
of the epinephrine circulating throughout the bloodstream 
of the impala in Figure 9.1, the hormone encounters many 
types of cells, but only certain target cells, those with the 
corresponding receptor protein, detect and respond to the 
epinephrine molecule. The signaling molecule is complemen-
tary in shape to a specific site on the receptor and attaches 
there, like a hand in a glove. The signaling molecule acts 
as a ligand, the term for a molecule that specifically binds 
to another (often larger) molecule. Ligand binding gener-
ally causes a receptor protein to undergo a change in shape. 
For many receptors, this shape change directly activates the 
receptor, enabling it to interact with other molecules in or on 
the cell. For other receptors, the immediate effect of ligand 
binding is to cause the aggregation of two or more receptor 
proteins, which leads to further molecular events inside the 
cell. Most signal receptors are plasma membrane proteins, but 
others are located inside the cell. We’ll look at both of these 
types next.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Reception
d2-adrenergic
receptors
Molecule
that mimics           
ligand
CholesterolPlasma membrane
. Figure 9.7 The structure of a G protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR). This is a model of the human b2-adrenergic receptor, 
which binds epinephrine (adrenaline). The receptor was crystallized 
(discussed later in this section) in the presence of both a molecule 
that mimics epinephrine (green in the model) and cholesterol in 
the membrane (orange). Two receptors (blue) are shown as ribbon 
models in a side view. Caffeine can also bind to this receptor.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   219 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 221 ===

220 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
/uni25BC Figure 9.8 Exploring Cell-Surface Transmembrane Receptors
Signaling moleculeActivated
receptor
Inactive
enzyme
GDP
GTP
GTP
G Protein-Coupled Receptors
A G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 
is a cell-surface transmembrane receptor that 
works with the help of a G protein, a pro-
tein that binds the energy-rich molecule GTP . 
Many different signaling molecules—including 
yeast mating factors, neurotransmitters, and 
epinephrine (adrenaline) and many other 
hormones—use GPCRs. 
    G protein-coupled receptors vary in the 
binding sites for their ligands and also for 
different types of G proteins inside the cell. 
Nevertheless, GPCR proteins are all remarkably 
similar in structure. In fact, they make up a 
large family of eukaryotic receptor proteins 
with a secondary structure in which the single 
polypeptide, represented here in a ribbon 
model, has seven transmembrane c helices 
(outlined with cylinders and depicted in a row 
for clarity). Specific loops between the helices 
(here, the loops on the right) form binding  
sites for signaling molecules (outside the cell) 
and G proteins (on the cytoplasmic side). 
    GPCR-based signaling systems are extremely 
widespread and diverse in their functions, 
including roles in embryonic development and 
sensory reception. In humans, for example, 
vision, smell, and taste depend on GPCRs (see 
Concept 50.4). Similarities in the structures of  
G proteins and GPCRs in diverse organisms suggest 
that G proteins and their associated receptors 
evolved very early among eukaryotes. 
    Malfunctions of the associated G proteins 
themselves  are involved in many human diseases,
including bacterial infections. The bacteria 
that cause cholera, pertussis (whooping cough), 
and botulism, among others, make their victims 
ill by producing toxins that interfere with G 
protein function. Up to 60% of all medicines 
used today exert their effects by influencing 
G protein pathways. 
GDP
Pi
Pi
Activated
enzyme
Cellular response
GTP
2When the appropriate signaling molecule binds to the extracellular 
side of the receptor, the receptor is activated and changes shape. 
Its cytoplasmic side then binds an inactive G protein, causing a GTP 
to displace the GDP . This activates the G protein.
3The activated G protein dissociates from the receptor, diffuses along 
the membrane, and then binds to an enzyme, altering the enzyme’s 
shape and activity. Once activated, the enzyme can trigger the next 
step leading to a cellular response. Binding of signaling molecules is 
reversible: Like other ligands, they bind and dissociate many times. 
The ligand concentration outside the cell determines how often a 
ligand is bound and initiates signaling.
4The changes in the enzyme and G protein are only temporary: The 
G protein also acts as a GTPase, hydrolyzing its bound GTP to GDP 
and   ; as a result, it can no longer activate the enzyme. The G 
protein leaves the enzyme, which returns to its inactive state. The G 
protein is now available for reuse. Its GTPase function allows the 
pathway shut down rapidly when the signaling molecule is no 
longer present.
Plasma membraneG protein-coupled
receptor
G protein
(inactive)CYTOPLASM
CYTOPLASM
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
Enzyme
1Attached but able to move along the cytoplasmic side of the 
membrane, a G protein functions as a molecular switch that is 
either on or off, depending on whether GDP or GTP is attached                                
—hence the term G protein. (GTP , or guanosine triphosphate, 
is similar to ATP .) When GDP is bound to the G protein, as shown 
above, the G protein is inactive. The receptor and G protein work 
together with another protein, usually an enzyme.  
GDP
Segment that
interacts with 
G proteins inside the cell
G protein-coupled receptor
Signaling molecule binding site
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   220 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 222 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 221
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) belong to a major class of 
plasma membrane receptors characterized by having enzymatic 
activity. An RTK is a protein kinase—an enzyme that catalyzes the 
transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to another protein. The part 
of the receptor protein extending into the cytoplasm functions 
more specifically as a tyrosine kinase, an enzyme that catalyzes the 
transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine 
of a substrate protein. Thus, RTKs are membrane receptors that 
attach phosphates to tyrosines.
    Upon binding a ligand such as a growth factor, one RTK may 
activate ten or more different transduction pathways and cell-
ular responses. Often, more than one signal transduction path-
way can be triggered at once, helping the cell regulate and 
coordinate many aspects of cell growth and cell reproduction. 
The ability of a single ligand-binding event to trigger so many 
pathways is a key difference between RTKs and GPCRs; GPCRs  
generally activate a single transduction pathway. Abnormal RTKs 
that function even in the absence of signaling molecules are 
associated with many kinds of cancer. 
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Signaling
molecule (ligand)
c helix in the 
membrane
Ligand-binding site
Receptor tyrosine
kinase proteins
(inactive monomers)
Tyrosines
Many receptor tyrosine kinases have the structure depicted 
schematically here. Before the signaling molecule binds, the
receptors exist as individual units referred to as monomers. Notice 
that each monomer has an extracellular ligand-binding site, an 
c helix spanning the membrane, and an intracellular tail containing 
multiple tyrosines.
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Dimer
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Signaling
molecule
Fully activated receptor
tyrosine kinase
(phosphorylated
dimer)
Activated tyrosine
kinase regions
(unphosphorylated
dimer)
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
TyrATP6 6 ADP
P
P
P
P
P
P
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
P
P
P
P
P
P
21 The binding of a signaling molecule (such as a growth factor) causes 
two receptor monomers to associate closely with each other, 
forming a complex known as a dimer, a process called dimerization. 
(In some cases, larger clusters form. The details of monomer    
association are a focus of current research.) 
3Dimerization activates the tyrosine kinase region of each monomer; 
each tyrosine kinase adds a phosphate from an ATP molecule to a 
tyrosine that is part of the tail of the other monomer.
4Now that the receptor is fully activated, it is recognized by specific 
relay proteins inside the cell. Each such protein binds to a specific 
phosphorylated tyrosine, undergoing a resulting structural change 
that activates the bound relay protein. Each activated protein 
triggers a transduction pathway, leading to a cellular response.
Activated relay
proteins
Inactive
relay proteins
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
CYTOPLASM
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOPLASM
Cellular
response 1
Cellular
response 2
Continued on next page
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   221 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 223 ===

222 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Ion Channel Receptors
A ligand-gated ion channel is a type of membrane channel 
receptor containing a region that can act as a “gate,” opening or 
closing the channel when the receptor changes shape. When a 
signaling molecule binds as a ligand to the channel receptor, the 
channel opens or closes, allowing or blocking the ﬂow of speciﬁc 
ions, such as Na+ or Ca2+. Like the other receptors we have 
discussed, these proteins bind the ligand at a speciﬁc site on 
their extracellular sides. 
Ligand-gated ion channels are very important in the nervous
system. For example, the neurotransmitter molecules released
at a synapse between two nerve cells (see Figure 9.5b) bind as
ligands to some ion channels on the receiving cell, causing the 
channels to open. Ions ﬂow in (or, in some cases, out), triggering 
an electrical signal that propagates down the length of the 
receiving cell. Some of the gated ion channels are controlled by 
electrical signals instead of ligands; these voltage-gated ion 
channels are crucial to the functioning of the nervous system, 
as you’ll see in Chapter 48. Some ion channels are present on
membranes of organelles, such as the ER.
2
1
3
Signaling
molecule
(ligand) 
Ligand-gated
ion channel receptor
Channel open
Ions
Plasma
membrane
Channel
closed
Channel closed
Cellular
response
When the ligand 
binds to the receptor 
and the channel 
opens, speciƂc ions 
can ﬂow through 
the channel and 
rapidly change the 
local concentration 
of that ion inside 
the cell. This change 
may directly affect 
the activity of the cell 
in soOe way.
When the ligand 
dissociates from 
this receptor, the 
channel closes and 
ions no longer 
enter the cell.
Here we show a 
ligand-gated ion 
channel receptor in 
which the channel 
remains closed 
until a ligand binds 
to the receptor.
/uni25BC Figure 9.8 (continued)
MAKE CONNECTIONS Is the flow of ions through a ligand-gated channel 
an example of active or passive transport? (Review Concepts 8.3 and 8.4.)
 Mastering Biology Animation: Acetylcholine Receptor
shown in Figure 9.7. In that case, the b-adrenergic receptor 
was stable enough to be crystallized only while it was among 
membrane molecules and in the presence of a molecule mim-
icking its ligand. Newer techniques that do not require crys-
tallization, like cryo-EM (see Figure 7.3), have shown promise 
in determining the structures of cell-surface receptors.
Abnormal functioning of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) 
is associated with many types of cancers. For example, some 
breast cancer patients have tumor cells with excessive levels 
of a receptor tyrosine kinase called HER2 (see Concept 12.3 
and Figure 18.27). Using molecular biological techniques, 
researchers have developed a protein called Herceptin that 
binds to HER2 on cells and inhibits cell division, thus thwart-
ing further tumor development. In some clinical studies, treat-
ment with Herceptin improved patient survival rates by more 
than one-third. One goal of ongoing research into these cell-
surface receptors and other cell-signaling proteins is develop-
ment of additional successful treatments.
Intracellular Receptors
Intracellular receptor proteins are found in either the cyto-
plasm or nucleus of target cells. To reach such a receptor, a 
signaling molecule passes through the target cell’s plasma 
membrane. A number of important signaling molecules 
can do this because they are either hydrophobic enough 
or small enough to cross the hydrophobic interior of the 
membrane (see Concept 8.1). Hydrophobic signaling mol-
ecules include steroid hormones and thyroid hormones of 
animals. Another chemical signaling molecule that possesses 
an intracellular receptor is nitric oxide (NO), a gas; this very 
small molecule readily passes between the membrane phos-
pholipids. Once a hormone or other signaling molecule has 
entered a cell, its binding to an intracellular receptor changes 
the receptor into a hormone-receptor complex that is able 
to cause a response—in many cases, the turning on or off of 
particular genes.
The behavior of aldosterone is a representative example 
of how steroid hormones work. This hormone is secreted by 
cells of the adrenal gland (a gland that lies above the kidney), 
then travels through the blood and enters cells all over the 
body. However, a response occurs only in kidney cells because 
they alone contain receptors for aldosterone. In these cells, 
the hormone binds to and activates the receptor protein. 
With aldosterone attached, the active form of the receptor 
protein then enters the nucleus and turns on specific genes 
that control water and sodium flow in kidney cells, ultimately 
affecting blood volume (Figure 9.9).
How does the activated hormone-receptor complex 
turn on genes? Recall that the genes in a cell’s DNA 
 Mastering Biology Interview with Diana 
Bautista: How cell signaling leads to itch  
and pain
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   222 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 224 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 223
function by being transcribed and processed into mes-
senger RNA (mRNA), which leaves the nucleus and is 
translated into a specific protein by ribosomes in the cyto -
plasm (see Figure 5.22). Special proteins called transcription 
factors control which genes are turned on—that is, which 
genes are transcribed into mRNA—in a particular cell at 
a particular time. When the aldosterone receptor is acti -
vated, it acts as a transcription factor that turns on specific 
genes. (You’ll learn more about transcription factors in 
Chapters 17 and 18.)
By acting as a transcription factor, the aldosterone receptor 
itself carries out two parts of the signaling pathway, as recep-
tor and transducer. Most other intracellular receptors func-
tion in the same way, although many of them, such as the 
thyroid hormone receptor, are already in the nucleus before 
the signaling molecule reaches them. Interestingly, many of 
these intracellular receptor proteins are structurally similar, 
suggesting an evolutionary kinship.
Hormone
(aldosterone)
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
Plasma
membraneReceptor
protein
Hormone-
receptor
complex
mRNA
DNA
NUCLEUS
CYTOPLASM
New 
protein
     The steroid
hormone aldosterone
passes through the
plasma membrane.
1
     Aldosterone binds
to a receptor protein
in the cytoplasm,
activating it.
2
     The hormone-
receptor complex
enters the nucleus
and binds to specific 
genes.
3
     The bound protein
acts as a transcription
factor, stimulating the
transcription of
the gene into mRNA.
4
     The mRNA is
translated into a
specific protein.
5
. Figure 9.9 Steroid hormone interacting with  
an intracellular receptor.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Why is a cell-surface receptor protein not 
required for this steroid hormone to enter the cell? (See Concept 8.2.)
 Mastering Biology Animation: Steroid Hormone Pathway
CONCEPT CHECK 9.2
1. Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a water-soluble signaling mol-
ecule. Would you expect the receptor for NGF to be intracel-
lular or in the plasma membrane? Explain.
2. WHAT IF? What would happen if the ligand binding to 
a ligand-gated ion channel did not dissociate from the 
channel?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS How is ligand binding similar  
to the process of allosteric regulation of enzymes?  
(See Figure 6.20.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 9.3
Signal transduction: Cascades  
of molecular interactions 
transmit signals from receptors 
to relay molecules in the cell
When receptors for signaling molecules are plasma mem-
brane proteins, like most of those we have discussed, the 
transduction stage of cell signaling is usually a multistep 
pathway involving many molecules. Steps often include 
activation of proteins by addition or removal of phosphate 
groups or release of other small molecules or ions that act 
as signaling molecules. One benefit of using multiple steps 
is that a signal caused by a small number of signaling mol-
ecules can be greatly amplified. If each molecule transmits 
the signal to numerous molecules at the next step in the 
series, the result is a geometric increase in the number of 
activated molecules by the end (see Figure 9.16). A second 
benefit of using multistep pathways is that they provide 
more opportunities for coordination and control than do 
simpler systems. This allows regulation of the response, as 
we’ll see later in the chapter.
Signal Transduction Pathways
The binding of a specific signaling molecule to a receptor 
in the plasma membrane triggers the first step in the signal 
transduction pathway—the chain of molecular interactions 
that leads to a particular response within the cell. Like falling 
dominoes, the signal-activated receptor activates another 
molecule, which activates yet another molecule, and so on, 
until the protein that produces the final cellular response 
is activated. The molecules that relay a signal from recep-
tor to response, which we call relay molecules in this book, 
are often proteins. Protein-protein interactions are a major 
theme of cell signaling—indeed, a unifying theme of all cel-
lular activities.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Signal Transduction Pathways
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   223 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 225 ===

224 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Serine/threonine kinases are widely involved in signaling 
pathways in animals, plants, and fungi.
Many signal transduction pathways use relay molecules 
that are protein kinases, and they often act on other protein 
kinases in the pathway. Figure 9.10 depicts a hypothetical 
pathway containing two different protein kinases that create 
a phosphorylation cascade. The sequence of steps shown 
in the figure is similar to many known pathways, includ-
ing those triggered in yeast by mating factors and in animal 
cells by many growth factors. The signal is transmitted by a 
cascade of protein phosphorylations, each causing a shape 
change in the phosphorylated protein. The shape change 
results from the interaction of the newly added phosphate 
groups with charged or polar amino acids on the protein 
being phosphorylated (see Figure 5.14). The shape change in 
turn alters the function of the protein, most often activating 
it. (In some cases, though, phosphorylation instead decreases 
the activity of the protein.)
A significant percentage of our own genes—about 2%—is 
thought to code for protein kinases. A single cell may have 
hundreds of different kinds, each specific for a different 
substrate protein. Together, protein kinases probably regu-
late the activity of a large proportion of the thousands of 
proteins in a cell. Among these are most of the proteins that, 
in turn, regulate cell division. Abnormal activity of such a 
Keep in mind that the original signaling molecule is not 
physically passed along a signaling pathway; in most cases, 
it never even enters the cell. When we say that the signal is 
relayed along a pathway, we mean that certain information is 
passed on. At each step, the signal is transduced into a differ-
ent form, commonly a shape change in the next protein. Very 
often, the shape change is brought about by phosphorylation.
Protein Phosphorylation  
and Dephosphorylation
Chapter 6 introduced the concept of activating a protein by 
adding one or more phosphate groups to it (see Figure 6.11a). 
In Figure 9.8, you have already seen how phosphorylation is 
involved in the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases. In fact, 
phosphorylation of proteins and its reverse, dephosphoryla-
tion, are commonly used in cells to regulate protein activity. 
An enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP to a 
protein is generally known as a protein kinase. Recall that 
a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is a specific kind of protein 
kinase that phosphorylates tyrosines on the other RTK in a 
dimer. Most cytoplasmic protein kinases, however, act on 
proteins different from themselves. Another distinction is that 
most cytoplasmic protein kinases phosphorylate either of two 
other amino acids, serine or threonine, rather than tyrosine. 
4     Protein 
phosphatases (PP) 
catalyze the 
removal of the 
phosphate groups 
from the proteins, 
making the proteins 
inactive again.
Signaling molecule
Activated relay molecule
Receptor
Inactive
protein kinase
1
Active
protein
kinase
1
Inactive
protein
Active
protein
P
ATP
ADP
Cellular
response
     A relay molecule
activates protein kinase 1.
1
Phosphorylation cascade
2
3
Inactive
protein kinase
2
Active
protein
kinase
2
P
ATP
ADP
     Active protein
kinase 1 activates
protein kinase 2.
     Active
protein kinase 2
phosphorylates a 
protein (purple) that 
brings about the cell‘s 
response to the signal.
PP
Pi
PP
Pi
c Figure 9.10 A phosphorylation 
cascade. In a phosphorylation cascade,  
a series of different proteins in a pathway 
are phosphorylated in turn, each protein 
adding a phosphate group to the next one 
in line. Here, phosphorylation activates each 
protein, and dephosphorylation returns it 
to its inactive form. The active and inactive 
forms of each protein are represented 
by different shapes to remind you that 
activation is usually associated with a change 
in molecular shape.
WHAT IF? What would happen if a mutation 
in protein kinase 2 made it incapable of being 
phosphorylated?
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   224 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 226 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 225
respond to changes in the cytosolic concentration of one or  
the other of these second messengers.
Cyclic AMP
Having discovered that epinephrine somehow causes glyco-
gen breakdown within cells, Earl Sutherland next looked for 
a second messenger that transmits the signal from the plasma 
membrane to the metabolic machinery in the cytoplasm. He 
found that binding of epinephrine to the G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) in the plasma membrane results in a rise in 
the cytosolic concentration of cyclic AMP (cAMP; cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate), a small molecule produced from 
ATP. As shown in Figure 9.11, an enzyme embedded in the 
plasma membrane, adenylyl cyclase (also known as adenyl-
ate cyclase), converts ATP to cAMP in response to an extracel-
lular signal—in this case, provided by epinephrine. When 
epinephrine outside the cell binds to a GPCR, it activates a 
G protein that in turn activates adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl 
cyclase can then catalyze the synthesis of many molecules 
of cAMP. In this way, the normal cellular concentration of 
cAMP can be boosted 20-fold in a matter of seconds. The 
cAMP broadcasts the signal to the cytoplasm. It does not per-
sist for long in the absence of the hormone because a different 
enzyme, called phosphodiesterase, converts cAMP to AMP. 
Another surge of epinephrine is needed to boost the cytosolic 
concentration of cAMP again.
Subsequent research has revealed that epinephrine is only 
one of many hormones and many other signaling molecules 
that lead to activation of adenylyl cyclase by G proteins and 
formation of cAMP (Figure 9.12). The immediate effect of an 
elevation in cAMP level is usually the activation of a serine/
threonine kinase called protein kinase A. The activated pro-
tein kinase A then phosphorylates various other proteins, 
depending on the cell type. (The complete pathway for 
epinephrine’s stimulation of glycogen breakdown is shown 
later, in Figure 9.16.)
kinase can cause abnormal cell division and contribute to 
the development of cancer.
Equally important in the phosphorylation cascade are 
the protein phosphatases, enzymes that can rapidly 
remove phosphate groups from proteins, a process called 
dephosphorylation. By dephosphorylating and thus inacti-
vating protein kinases, phosphatases provide the mecha-
nism for turning off the signal transduction pathway when 
the initial signal is no longer present. Phosphatases also 
make the protein kinases available for reuse, enabling 
the cell to respond again to an extracellular signal. The 
phosphorylation-dephosphorylation system acts as a 
molecular switch in the cell, turning activities on or off, or 
up or down, as required. At any given moment, the activ-
ity of a protein regulated by phosphorylation depends on 
the balance in the cell between active kinase molecules and 
active phosphatase molecules.
Small Molecules and Ions  
as Second Messengers
Not all components of signal transduction pathways are 
proteins. Many signaling pathways also involve small, 
nonprotein, water-soluble molecules or ions called second 
messengers. (The pathway’s “first messenger” is considered 
to be the extracellular signaling molecule—the ligand—that 
binds to the membrane receptor.) Because they are small 
and water-soluble, they can readily spread through regions 
of the cell by diffusion. For example, as we’ll see shortly, 
a second messenger called cyclic AMP carries the signal 
initiated by epinephrine from the plasma membrane of a 
liver or muscle cell into the cell’s interior, where the signal 
eventually brings about glycogen breakdown. Second mes-
sengers participate in pathways that are initiated by both  
G protein-coupled receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases. 
The two most common second messengers are cyclic AMP 
and calcium ions, Ca2+. A large variety of relay proteins 
H2O
Adenylyl cyclase
Pyrophosphate
AMP
Phosphodiesterase
PPi
cAMPATP
P
PPPP
5¿C
3¿C
. Figure 9.11 Cyclic AMP. The second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) is made from ATP by 
adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme embedded in the plasma membrane. The phosphate group in 
cAMP is attached to both the 5¿ and the 3¿ carbons; cAMP’s cyclic arrangement is the basis for 
its name. cAMP is inactivated by phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that converts it to AMP.
WHAT IF? What would happen if a molecule that inactivated 
phosphodiesterase were introduced into the cell?
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   225 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 227 ===

226 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Our understanding of signaling pathways involv-
ing cyclic AMP or related messengers has allowed us to 
develop treatments for certain conditions in humans such 
as erectile dysfunction. In one pathway, the gas nitric 
oxide (NO) is released by a cell and enters a neighbor -
ing muscle cell, where it causes production of a molecule 
similar to cAMP called cyclic GMP (cGMP). The cGMP then 
acts as a second messenger that causes relaxation of mus -
cles, such as those in the walls of arteries. A compound 
that prolongs the signal (by inhibiting the hydrolysis of 
cGMP to GMP) was originally prescribed for chest pains 
because it relaxed blood vessels and increased blood flow 
to the heart muscle. Under the trade name Viagra, this 
compound is now widely used as a treatment for erectile 
dysfunction in human males. Because Viagra leads to 
dilation of blood vessels, it also allows increased blood 
flow to the penis, optimizing physiological conditions for 
penile erections.
Calcium Ions and Inositol Trisphosphate (IP3)
Many of the signaling molecules that function in animals—
including neurotransmitters, growth factors, and some 
hormones—induce responses in their target cells through 
signal transduction pathways that increase the cytosolic 
concentration of calcium ions (Ca2+). Calcium is even more 
widely used than cAMP as a second messenger. Increasing the 
local cytosolic concentration of Ca2+ causes many responses 
in animal cells, including muscle cell contraction, exocytosis 
of molecules (secretion), and cell division. In plant cells, a 
wide range of hormonal and environmental stimuli can cause 
brief increases in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, triggering var-
ious signaling pathways, such as the pathway for greening in 
response to light (see Figure 39.4). Cells use Ca2+ as a second 
messenger in pathways triggered by both G protein-coupled 
receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases.
Although cells always contain some Ca2+, this ion can 
function as a second messenger because its concentration 
in the cytosol is normally much lower than the concentra-
tion outside the cell (Figure 9.13). In fact, the level of Ca2+ 
in the blood and extracellular fluid of an animal is often 
more than 10,000 times higher than that in the cytosol. 
Calcium ions are actively transported out of  
the cell and are actively imported from the cytosol into the 
endoplasmic reticulum (and, under some conditions, into 
mitochondria and chloroplasts) by various protein pumps. 
As a result, the calcium concentration in the ER is usually 
much higher than that in the cytosol. Because the cytosolic 
calcium level is low, a small change in absolute numbers of 
ions represents a relatively large percentage change in local 
calcium concentration.
In response to a signal relayed by a signal transduction 
pathway, the cytosolic calcium level may rise, usually by a 
Further regulation of cell metabolism is provided by 
other G protein systems that inhibit adenylyl cyclase. In 
these systems, a different signaling molecule activates a 
different receptor, which in turn activates an inhibitory 
G protein that blocks activation of adenylyl cyclase. Cell 
activities can be fine-tuned by the balance between these 
systems.
Now that we know about the role of cAMP in G protein 
signaling pathways, we can explain in molecular detail how 
certain microorganisms cause disease. Consider cholera, a 
disease that is frequently epidemic in places where the water 
supply is contaminated with human feces. People acquire the 
cholera bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, by drinking contaminated 
water. The bacteria form a biofilm on the lining of the small 
intestine and produce a toxin. The cholera toxin is an enzyme 
that chemically modifies a G protein involved in regulating 
salt and water secretion. Because the modified G protein is 
unable to hydrolyze GTP to GDP, it remains stuck in its active 
form, continuously stimulating adenylyl cyclase to make 
cAMP (see the question with Figure 9.12). The resulting high 
concentration of cAMP causes the intestinal cells to secrete 
large amounts of salts into the intestines, with water follow-
ing by osmosis. An infected person quickly develops profuse 
diarrhea and if left untreated can soon die from the loss of 
water and salts.
GTP
GDP
First messenger
(signaling molecule
such as epinephrine)
ATP Second
messenger
G protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) G protein
Adenylyl
cyclase
Protein
kinase A
cAMP
Cellular responses
First messenger 
binds to GPCR, activating it.
1
Activated GPCR binds to G
protein, which is then bound by GTP,
activating the G protein.
2
Activated G protein/ GTP binds to
adenylyl cyclase. GTP is hydrolyzed,
activating adenylyl cyclase.
3
Activated adenylyl cyclase
converts ATP to cAMP.
4
cAMP, a second messenger, activates
another protein, leading to cellular responses.
5
1
2 3
4
5
. Figure 9.12 cAMP as a second messenger in a G protein 
signaling pathway.
DRAW IT The bacterium that causes the disease cholera produces a 
toxin that locks the G protein in its activated state. Review Figure 9.8, 
then draw this figure as it would be if cholera toxin were present. (You 
do not need to draw the cholera toxin molecule.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   226 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 228 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 227
mechanism that releases Ca2+ from the cell’s ER. The path-
ways leading to calcium release involve two other second 
messengers, inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacyl-
glycerol (DAG). These two messengers are produced by 
cleavage of a certain kind of phospholipid in the plasma 
membrane. Figure 9.14 shows the complete picture of how 
a signal causes IP3 to stimulate the release of calcium from 
the ER. Because IP3 acts before calcium in these pathways, 
calcium could be considered a “third messenger.” However, 
scientists use the term second messenger for all small, nonpro-
tein components of signal transduction pathways.
Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
Plasma
membrane
EXTRACELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOSOL
Nucleus
Mitochondrion
ATP
ATP
Ca2+
pump
Key High [Ca2+] Low [Ca2+]
. Figure 9.13 The maintenance of calcium ion concentrations 
in an animal cell. The Ca2+ concentration in the cytosol is usually 
much lower (light green) than in the extracellular fluid and ER 
(dark green). Protein pumps in the plasma membrane and the ER 
membrane, driven by ATP, move Ca2+ from the cytosol into the 
extracellular fluid and into the lumen of the ER. Mitochondrial 
pumps, driven by chemiosmosis (see Concept 10.4), move Ca2+ into 
mitochondria when the calcium level in the cytosol rises significantly.
     IP3
(second messenger)
Various
proteins
activated
Cellular
responses
Ca2+
(second 
messenger)
G protein
Phospholipase C
PIP2
DAGG protein-coupled
receptor
Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
lumen
EXTRA-
CELLULAR
FLUID
CYTOSOL
IP3-gated
calcium channel
Ca2+
Signaling molecule
(first messenger)
GTP
     A signaling molecule binds
to a receptor, leading to
activation of phospholipase C.
1      Phospholipase C cleaves a
plasma membrane phospholipid
called PIP2 into DAG and IP3.
2      DAG functions as
a second messenger
in other pathways.
3
 4  IP3 quickly diffuses through
the cytosol and binds to an IP3-
gated calcium channel in the ER
membrane, causing it to open.
 4  Calcium ions flow out of
the ER (down their con-
centration gradient), raising
the Ca2+ level in the cytosol.
 4  The calcium ions
activate the next
protein in one or more
signaling pathways.
4 5 6
GDP
c Figure 9.14 Calcium and IP3 in 
signaling pathways. Calcium ions (Ca2+)  
and inositol trisphosphate (IP3) function 
as second messengers in many signal 
transduction pathways. In this figure, the 
process is initiated by the binding of a 
signaling molecule to a G protein-coupled 
receptor. A receptor tyrosine kinase could 
also initiate this pathway by activating 
phospholipase C.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain the difference 
in function (in terms of ion transport) between 
the Ca2+ pump in Figure 9.13 and the Ca2+ 
channel protein shown here. (See Figure 8.17.)
CONCEPT CHECK 9.3
1. What is a protein kinase, and what is its role in a signal 
transduction pathway?
2. For the purpose of signaling, what is the advantage of  
having a low concentration of calcium in the cytosol?
3. What is the actual “signal” that is being transduced in 
any signal transduction pathway, such as those shown in 
Figures 9.6 and 9.10? In what way is this information being 
passed from the exterior to the interior of the cell?
4. WHAT IF? If you exposed a cell to a ligand that binds to a 
receptor and activates phospholipase C, predict the effect the 
IP3-gated calcium channel would have on Ca2+ concentration 
in the cytosol.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   227 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 229 ===

228 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
CONCEPT 9.4
Cellular response: Cell signaling 
leads to regulation of transcription 
or cytoplasmic activities
We now take a closer look at the cell’s subsequent response to 
an extracellular signal—what some researchers call the “out-
put response.” What is the nature of the final step in a signal-
ing pathway?
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Responses
Ultimately, a signal transduction pathway leads to the regu-
lation of one or more cellular activities. The response may 
occur in the nucleus or in the cytoplasm of the cell.
Many signaling pathways ultimately regulate protein syn-
thesis, usually by turning specific genes on or off in the nucleus. 
Like an activated steroid receptor (see Figure 9.9), the final 
activated molecule in a signaling pathway may function as a 
transcription factor. Figure 9.15 shows an example in which a 
signaling pathway activates a transcription factor that turns  
a gene on: The response to this growth factor signal is transcrip-
tion, the synthesis of one or more specific mRNAs, which will be 
translated in the cytoplasm into specific proteins. In other cases, 
the transcription factor might regulate a gene by turning it off. 
Often, a transcription factor regulates several different genes.
Sometimes a signaling pathway may regulate the activity 
of proteins rather than causing their synthesis by activating 
gene expression. This directly affects proteins that function 
outside the nucleus. For example, a signal may cause the 
opening or closing of an ion channel in the plasma mem-
brane or a change in the activity of a metabolic enzyme. As we 
have seen, the response of liver cells to the hormone epineph-
rine helps regulate cellular energy metabolism by affecting 
the activity of an enzyme. The final step in the epinephrine 
signaling pathway activates the enzyme that catalyzes the 
breakdown of glycogen. Figure 9.16 shows the complete 
pathway leading to the release of glucose 1-phosphate mole-
cules from glycogen. Notice that as each molecule is activated, 
the response is amplified, a subject we’ll return to shortly.
Signal receptors, relay molecules, and second messen-
gers participate in a variety of pathways, leading to both 
nuclear and cytoplasmic responses, including cell division. 
Malfunctioning of growth factor pathways like the one in 
Figure 9.15 can contribute to abnormal cell division and the 
development of cancer, as we’ll see in Concept 18.5.
Regulation of the Response
Whether the response occurs in the nucleus or in the cyto-
plasm, it is not simply turned “on” or “off.” Rather, the extent 
and specificity of the response are regulated in multiple ways. 
CYTOPLASM
DNA
Gene
Inactive
transcription
factor
Growth factor
mRNA
NUCLEUS
Active
transcription
factor
P
Phosphorylation
cascade Signal 
transduction
Signal 
reception
Cellular
response
Receptor
1     The initial signaling molecule
(here, a growth factor) triggers a
phosphorylation cascade.
2     Once activated, the
last kinase in the cascade
enters the nucleus...
3     The transcription factor stimulates
transcription of a specific gene.
4     The resulting mRNAs direct
the synthesis of a particular
protein in the cytoplasm.
...and activates a
transcription factor
. Figure 9.15 Nuclear responses to a signal: the activation 
of a specific gene by a growth factor. This diagram shows a 
typical signaling pathway that leads to regulation of gene activity 
in the cell nucleus. The initial signaling molecule, in this case a 
growth factor, triggers a phosphorylation cascade, as in Figure 9.10. 
(The ATP molecules and phosphate groups are not shown.) Once 
phosphorylated, the last kinase in the sequence enters the nucleus 
and activates a transcription factor, which stimulates transcription 
of a specific gene (or genes). The resulting mRNAs then direct the 
synthesis of a particular protein.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Nuclear Response:  
Activating a Gene
Here we’ll consider four aspects of this regulation. First, as 
mentioned earlier, signaling pathways generally amplify 
the cell’s response to a single signaling event. The degree of 
amplification depends on the function of the specific mol-
ecules in the pathway. Second, the many steps in a multistep 
pathway provide control points at which the cell’s response 
can be further regulated, contributing to the specificity of 
the response and allowing coordination with other signal-
ing pathways. Third, the overall efficiency of the response is 
enhanced by the presence of proteins known as scaffolding 
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   228 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 230 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 229
proteins. Finally, a crucial point in regulating the response is 
the termination of the signal.
Signal Amplification
Elaborate enzyme cascades amplify the cell’s response to a 
signal. At each catalytic step in the cascade, the number of 
activated products can be much greater than in the preceding 
step. For example, in the epinephrine-triggered pathway in 
Figure 9.16, each adenylyl cyclase molecule catalyzes the for-
mation of 100 or so cAMP molecules, each molecule of pro-
tein kinase A phosphorylates about 10 molecules of the next 
kinase in the pathway, and so on. The amplification effect 
stems from the fact that these proteins persist in their active 
form long enough to process multiple molecules of substrate 
before they become inactive again. As a result of the signal’s 
amplification, a small number of epinephrine molecules 
binding to receptors on the surface of a liver cell or muscle 
cell can lead to the release of hundreds of millions of glucose 
molecules from glycogen.
The Specificity of Cell Signaling and Coordination  
of the Response
Consider two different cells in your body—a liver cell and a 
heart muscle cell, for example. Both are in contact with your 
bloodstream and are therefore constantly exposed to many 
different hormone molecules, as well as to local regulators 
secreted by nearby cells. Yet the liver cell responds to some sig-
nals but ignores others, and the same is true for the heart cell. 
And some kinds of signals trigger responses in both cells—but 
different responses. For instance, epinephrine stimulates the 
liver cell to break down glycogen, but the main response of 
the heart cell to epinephrine is contraction, leading to a more 
rapid heartbeat. How do we account for this difference?
The explanation for the specificity exhibited in cellular 
responses to signals is the same as the basic explanation for 
virtually all differences between cells: Because different kinds 
of cells turn on different sets of genes, different kinds of cells 
have different collections of proteins. The response of a cell to 
a signal depends on its particular collection of signal recep-
tor proteins, relay proteins, and proteins needed to carry out 
the response. A liver cell, for example, is poised to respond 
appropriately to epinephrine by having the proteins listed in 
Figure 9.16 as well as those needed to manufacture glycogen.
Thus, two cells that respond differently to the same signal 
differ in one or more proteins that respond to the signal. Also, 
within some cells, there are more complex pathways that 
branch or converge, as shown in Figure 9.17. Notice, though, 
that these different pathways still have some molecules in 
common. For example, cells A, B, and C all use the same 
receptor protein for the red signaling molecule; differences 
in other proteins account for their differing responses. In cell 
D, a different receptor protein is used for the same signaling 
molecule, leading to yet another response. In cell B,  
Active G protein (102 molecules)
Inactive
adenylyl cyclase
Active adenylyl cyclase (102)
Inactive
protein kinase A
Active protein kinase A (104)
Inactive
phosphorylase kinase
Active phosphorylase kinase (105)
Inactive
glycogen phosphorylase
Active glycogen phosphorylase (106)
Glycogen
Glucose 1-phosphate
 (108 molecules)
ATP
Cyclic AMP (104)
Signal reception
Binding of epinephrine to G protein-coupled receptor (1 molecule)
Inactive
G protein
Signal transduction
 
Cellular response
. Figure 9.16 Cytoplasmic response to a signal:  
the stimulation of glycogen breakdown by epinephrine 
(adrenaline). In this signaling system, the hormone epinephrine 
acts through a G protein-coupled receptor to activate a succession 
of relay molecules, including cAMP and two protein kinases (see 
also Figure 9.12). The final protein activated is the enzyme glycogen 
phosphorylase, which uses inorganic phosphate to release glucose 
monomers from glycogen in the form of glucose 1-phosphate 
molecules. This pathway amplifies the hormonal signal: One receptor 
protein can activate approximately 100 molecules of G protein, 
and each enzyme in the pathway, once activated, can act on many 
molecules of its substrate, the next molecule in the cascade. The 
number of activated molecules given for each step is approximate.
VISUAL SKILLS In the figure, how many glucose 1-phosphate molecules 
are released in response to one signaling molecule? Calculate the factor by 
which the response is amplified in going from each step to the next.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cytoplasmic Response: 
Glycogen Breakdown
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   229 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 231 ===

230 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
important in regulating and coordinating a cell’s responses 
to information coming in from different sources in the body. 
(You’ll learn more about this coordination in Concept 9.5.) 
Moreover, the use of some of the same proteins in more than 
one pathway allows the cell to economize on the number of 
different proteins it must make.
a pathway triggered by one signal diverges to produce two 
responses; such branched pathways often involve receptor 
tyrosine kinases (which can activate multiple relay proteins) 
or second messengers (which can regulate numerous pro-
teins). In cell C, two pathways triggered by separate signals 
converge to modulate a single response. Branching of path-
ways and “cross-talk” (interaction) between pathways are 
Response 2 Response 3
Response 5Response 4
Activation
or inhibition
Cell B. Pathway branches, 
leading to two responses.
Cell C. Cross-talk occurs 
between two pathways.
Cell D. Different receptor
leads to a different response.
Response 1
Signaling
molecule
Receptor
Relay
molecules
Cell A. Pathway leads 
to a single response.
. Figure 9.17 The specificity of cell signaling. The particular 
proteins a cell possesses determine what signaling molecules it 
responds to and the nature of the response. The four cells in these 
diagrams respond to the same signaling molecule (red) in different 
ways because each has a different set of proteins (purple and teal). 
Note, however, that the same kinds of molecules can participate in 
more than one pathway.
VISUAL SKILLS Study the signaling pathway shown in Figure 9.14, 
and explain how the situation pictured for cell B in Figure 9.17 could 
apply to that pathway.
 Instructors: The Scientific Skills Exercise “Using Experiments to 
Test a Model” can be assigned in Mastering Biology. It explores 
the cellular response of a yeast cell to the signal initiated by a 
mating factor from a cell of the opposite mating type.
Signaling Efficiency: Scaffolding Proteins  
and Signaling Complexes
The illustrations of signaling pathways in Figure 9.17 (as well 
as diagrams of other pathways in this chapter) are greatly sim-
plified. The diagrams show only a few relay molecules and, 
for clarity’s sake, display these molecules spread out in the 
cytosol. If this were true in the cell, signaling pathways would 
operate very inefficiently because most relay molecules are 
proteins, and proteins are too large to diffuse quickly through 
the viscous cytosol. How does a given protein kinase, for 
instance, find its protein substrate?
In many cases, the efficiency of signal transduction 
is apparently increased by the presence of scaffolding 
proteins, large relay proteins to which several other 
relay proteins are simultaneously attached (Figure 9.18). 
Researchers have found scaffolding proteins in brain cells 
that permanently hold together networks of signaling pathway 
proteins at synapses. This hardwiring enhances the speed 
and accuracy of signal transfer between cells because the rate 
of protein-protein interaction is not limited by diffusion. 
Furthermore, in some cases the scaffolding proteins them-
selves may directly activate relay proteins.
The importance of the relay proteins that serve as points 
of branching or intersection in signaling pathways is high-
lighted by the problems arising when these proteins are 
Three
different
protein
kinases
Signaling
molecule
Plasma
membrane
Receptor
Scaffolding
protein
. Figure 9.18 A scaffolding protein. The scaffolding protein 
shown here (orange) simultaneously binds to a specific activated 
membrane receptor and three different protein kinases. This physical 
arrangement facilitates signal transduction by these molecules.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   230 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 232 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 231
defective or missing. For instance, in an inherited disorder 
called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), the absence of a 
single relay protein leads to such diverse effects as abnormal 
bleeding, eczema, and a predisposition to infections and leu-
kemia. These symptoms are thought to arise primarily from 
the absence of the protein in cells of the immune system. By 
studying normal cells, scientists found that the WAS protein 
is located just beneath the immune cell surface. The protein 
interacts both with microfilaments of the cytoskeleton and 
with several different components of signaling pathways that 
relay information from the cell surface, including pathways 
regulating immune cell proliferation. This multifunctional 
relay protein is thus both a branch point and an important 
intersection point in a complex signal transduction net-
work that controls immune cell behavior. When the WAS 
protein is absent, the cytoskeleton is not properly organized 
and signaling pathways are disrupted, leading to the WAS 
symptoms.
Termination of the Signal
In the interest of keeping Figure 9.17 simple, we did not show 
the inactivation mechanisms that are an essential aspect of 
any cell-signaling pathway. For a cell of a multicellular organ-
ism to remain capable of responding to incoming signals, 
each molecular change in its signaling pathways must last 
only a short time. As we saw in the cholera example, if a sig-
naling pathway component becomes locked into one state, 
whether active or inactive, consequences for the organism 
can be serious.
The ability of a cell to receive new signals depends on 
reversibility of the changes produced by prior signals. The 
binding of signaling molecules to receptors is reversible. As 
the external concentration of signaling molecules falls, fewer 
receptors are bound at any given moment, and the unbound 
receptors revert to their inactive form. The cellular response 
occurs only when the concentration of receptors with bound 
signaling molecules is above a certain threshold. When the 
number of active receptors falls below that threshold, the cel-
lular response ceases. Then, by a variety of means, the relay 
molecules return to their inactive forms: The GTPase activity 
intrinsic to a G protein hydrolyzes its bound GTP; the enzyme 
phosphodiesterase converts cAMP to AMP; protein phospha-
tases inactivate phosphorylated kinases and other proteins; 
and so forth. As a result, the cell is soon ready to respond to a 
fresh signal.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Mechanism  
of Hormone Action: Second Messenger cAMP
In this section, we explored the complexity of signaling 
initiation and termination in a single pathway, and we saw 
the potential for pathways to intersect with each other. In the 
next section, we’ll consider one especially important network 
of interacting pathways in the cell.
CONCEPT CHECK 9.4
1. How can a target cell’s response to a single hormone molecule 
result in a response that affects a million other molecules?
2. WHAT IF? If two cells have different scaffolding proteins, 
explain how they might behave differently in response to 
the same signaling molecule.
3. WHAT IF? Some human diseases are associated with mal-
functioning protein phosphatases. How would such pro-
teins affect signaling pathways? (Review the discussion of 
protein phosphatases in Concept 9.3 and see Figure 9.10.)
4. Epinephrine affects heart muscle cells by causing them to 
mobilize glucose, contract faster, and increase heart rate. The 
muscle cells around lungs and airways, on the other hand, 
have the opposite response to epinephrine: They relax, allow-
ing more air to be breathed in. What might explain why 
respiratory (breathing-related) muscle cells can respond so 
differently from heart muscle cells?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 9.5
Apoptosis requires integration of 
multiple cell-signaling pathways
When signaling pathways were first discovered, they were 
thought to be linear, independent pathways. Our understanding 
of cellular communication has benefited from the realization 
that signaling pathway components interact with each other in 
various ways. For a cell to carry out the appropriate response, cel-
lular proteins often must integrate multiple signals. Let’s consider 
an important cellular process—cellular suicide—as an example.
Cells that are infected, are damaged, or have reached the 
end of their functional life span often undergo “programmed 
cell death” (Figure 9.19). The best-understood type of this 
controlled cell suicide is apoptosis (from the Greek, meaning 
“falling off,” and used in a classic Greek poem to refer to leaves 
falling from a tree). During this process, cellular agents chop up 
 Mastering Biology Video: Phosphate-Induced Apoptosis
2 om
. Figure 9.19 Apoptosis of a human white blood cell. On 
the left is a normal white blood cell, while on the right is a white 
blood cell undergoing apoptosis. The apoptotic cell is shrinking and 
forming lobes (“blebs”), which eventually are shed as membrane-
bounded cell fragments (colorized SEMs).
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   231 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 233 ===

232 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
the DNA and fragment the organelles and other cytoplasmic 
components. The cell shrinks and becomes lobed (a change 
called “blebbing”), and the cell’s parts are packaged up in vesi-
cles that are engulfed and digested by specialized scavenger cells, 
leaving no trace. Apoptosis protects neighboring cells from dam-
age that they would otherwise suffer if a dying cell merely leaked 
out all its contents, including its many digestive enzymes.
The signal that triggers all of the complex events that occur 
during apoptosis can come from either outside or inside the cell. 
Outside the cell, signaling molecules released from other cells can 
initiate a signal transduction pathway that activates the genes 
and proteins responsible for carrying out cell death. Within a cell 
whose DNA has been irretrievably damaged, a series of protein-
protein interactions can pass along a signal that similarly triggers 
cell death. Considering some examples of apoptosis can help us 
to see how signaling pathways are integrated in cells.
Apoptosis in the Soil Worm  
Caenorhabditis elegans
The molecular mechanisms of apoptosis were worked out by 
researchers studying embryonic development of a small soil 
worm, a nematode called Caenorhabditis elegans. Because the 
adult worm has only about 1,000 cells, the researchers were 
able to work out the entire ancestry of each cell. The timely 
suicide of cells occurs exactly 131 times during normal devel-
opment of C. elegans, at precisely the same points in the cell 
lineage of each worm. In worms and other species, apoptosis 
is triggered by signals that activate a cascade of “suicide” pro-
teins in the cells destined to die.
Genetic research on C. elegans initially revealed two key 
apoptosis genes, called ced-3 and ced-4 (ced stands for “cell 
death”), which encode proteins essential for apoptosis. The 
proteins are called Ced-3 and Ced-4, respectively. These and 
most other proteins involved in apoptosis are continually 
present in cells, but in inactive form; thus, regulation in this 
case occurs at the level of protein activity rather than through 
gene activity and protein synthesis. In C. elegans, a protein in 
the outer mitochondrial membrane, called Ced-9 (the product 
of the ced-9 gene), serves as a master regulator of apoptosis, 
acting as a brake in the absence of a signal promoting apopto-
sis (Figure 9.20a). When a death signal is received by the cell, 
signal transduction involves a change in Ced-9 that disables 
the brake, and the apoptotic pathway activates proteases and 
nucleases, enzymes that cut up the proteins and DNA of the 
cell. The main proteases of apoptosis are called caspases; in the 
nematode, the chief caspase is the Ced-3 protein.
Apoptotic Pathways and the Signals  
That Trigger Them
In humans and other mammals, several different path-
ways, involving about 15 different caspases, can carry out 
Active Ced-9 protein
inhibits Ced-4 activity.
Receptor
for death-
signaling
molecule
Death-
signaling
molecule
Ced-4 Ced-3
Inactive proteins
(a) No death signal. As long as Ced-9, located in the outer 
mitochondrial membrane, is active, apoptosis is inhibited, and 
the cell remains alive.
(b) Death signal. When a cell receives a death signal, Ced-9 is 
inactivated, relieving its inhibition of Ced-4. Active Ced-4 
activates Ced-3, a protease, which triggers a cascade of reactions 
leading to the activation of nucleases and other proteases. The 
action of these enzymes causes the changes seen in apoptotic 
cells and eventually leads to cell death.
Inactive Ced-9 does
not inhibit Ced-4.
Cell
forms
blebs
Active
Ced-4
Active
Ced-3
Activation
cascade
Other
proteases
Nucleases
Mitochondrion
. Figure 9.20 Molecular basis of apoptosis in C. elegans. 
Three proteins, Ced-3, Ced-4, and Ced-9, are critical to apoptosis and 
its regulation in the nematode. Apoptosis is more complicated in 
mammals but involves proteins similar to those in C. elegans.
apoptosis. The pathway that is used depends on the type 
of cell and on the particular signal that initiates apoptosis. 
One major pathway involves certain mitochondrial pro-
teins that are triggered to form molecular pores in the mito-
chondrial outer membrane, causing it to leak and release 
other proteins that promote apoptosis. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, these latter include cytochrome c, which functions 
in mitochondrial electron transport in healthy cells (see 
Figure 10.14) but acts as a cell death factor when released 
from mitochondria. The process of mitochondrial apoptosis 
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   232 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 234 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 233
morphogenesis of hands and feet in humans and paws 
in other mammals (Figure 9.21). The level of apoptosis 
between the developing digits is lower in the webbed feet 
of ducks and other water birds than in the nonwebbed feet 
of land birds, such as chickens. In the case of humans, the 
failure of appropriate apoptosis can result in webbed fin -
gers and toes.
Significant evidence points to the involvement of apop-
tosis in certain degenerative diseases of the nervous system, 
such as Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease. In 
Alzheimer’s disease, an accumulation of aggregated proteins 
in neuronal cells activates an enzyme that triggers apoptosis, 
resulting in the loss of brain function seen in these patients. 
Furthermore, cancer can result from a failure of cell suicide; 
some cases of human melanoma, for example, have been 
linked to faulty forms of the human version of the C. elegans 
Ced-4 protein. It is not surprising, therefore, that the signal-
ing pathways feeding into apoptosis are quite elaborate. After 
all, the life-or-death question is the most fundamental one 
imaginable for a cell.
This chapter has introduced you to many of the general 
mechanisms of cell communication, such as ligand binding, 
protein-protein interactions and shape changes, cascades of 
interactions, and protein phosphorylation. Throughout your 
study of biology, you will encounter numerous examples of 
cell signaling.
in mammals uses proteins similar to the nematode proteins 
Ced-3, Ced-4, and Ced-9. These can be thought of as relay 
proteins capable of transducing the apoptotic signal.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Apoptosis
At key gateways into the apoptotic program, relay pro-
teins integrate signals from several different sources and can 
send a cell down an apoptotic pathway. Often, the signal 
originates outside the cell, like the death-signaling molecule 
depicted in Figure 9.20b, which presumably was released by 
a neighboring cell. When a death-signaling ligand occupies 
a cell-surface receptor, this binding leads to activation of cas-
pases and other enzymes that carry out apoptosis, without 
involving the mitochondrial pathway. This process of signal 
reception, transduction, and response is similar to what we 
have discussed throughout this chapter. In a twist on the clas-
sic scenario, two other types of alarm signals that can lead 
to apoptosis originate from inside the cell rather than from 
a cell-surface receptor. One signal comes from the nucleus, 
generated when the DNA has suffered irreparable damage, 
and a second comes from the endoplasmic reticulum when 
excessive protein misfolding occurs. Mammalian cells make 
life-or-death “decisions” by somehow integrating the death 
signals and life signals they receive from these external and 
internal sources.
A built-in cell suicide mechanism is essential to devel -
opment and maintenance in all animals. The similari-
ties between apoptosis genes in nematodes and those in 
mammals, as well as the observation that apoptosis occurs 
in multicellular fungi and even in single-celled yeasts, 
indicate that the basic mechanism evolved early in the 
evolution of eukaryotes. In vertebrates, apoptosis is essen -
tial for normal development of the nervous system, for 
normal operation of the immune system, and for normal 
Interdigital tissue Cells undergoing apoptosis Space between digits1 mm
. Figure 9.21 Effect of apoptosis during paw development in the mouse. In mice, humans, 
other mammals, and land birds, the embryonic region that develops into feet or hands initially has a 
solid, platelike structure. Apoptosis eliminates the cells in the interdigital regions, thus forming the 
digits. The embryonic mouse paws shown in these fluorescence light micrographs are stained so that 
cells undergoing apoptosis appear a bright yellowish green. Apoptosis of cells begins at the margin 
of each interdigital region (left), peaks as the tissue in these regions is reduced (middle), and is no 
longer visible when the interdigital tissue has been eliminated (right).
CONCEPT CHECK 9.5
1. Give an example of apoptosis during embryonic develop-
ment, and explain its function in the developing embryo.
2. WHAT IF? If apoptosis occurred when it should not, what 
types of protein defects might be the cause? What types 
could result in apoptosis not occurring when it should?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   233 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 235 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 9.1
External signals are converted to responses within  
the cell (pp. 215–219)
• Signal transduction pathways are crucial for many processes. 
Bacterial cells can sense the local density of bacterial cells (quo-
rum sensing). Signaling during yeast cell mating has much in 
common with processes in multicellular organisms, suggesting an 
early evolutionary origin of signaling mechanisms.
• Local signaling by animal cells involves direct contact or the 
secretion of local regulators. For long-distance signaling, ani-
mal and plant cells use hormones; animals also pass signals 
electrically.
• Like epinephrine, other hormones that bind to membrane recep-
tors trigger a three-stage cell-signaling pathway:
Relay molecules
Activation
of cellular
response
Signal reception
Signaling 
molecule
Receptor
1 Signal transduction2 Cellular response3
1 2 3
? What determines whether a cell responds to a hormone such as 
epinephrine? What determines how a cell responds to such a hormone?
CONCEPT 9.2
Signal reception: A signaling molecule binds  
to a receptor, causing it to change shape (pp. 219–223)
• The binding between signaling molecule (ligand) and receptor is 
highly specific. A specific shape change in a receptor is often the 
initial transduction of the signal.
• Three of the major types of cell-surface transmembrane receptors 
are the following: (1) G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) 
work with cytoplasmic G proteins. Ligand binding activates 
the receptor, which then activates a specific G protein, which 
activates yet another protein, thus propagating the signal. (2) 
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) react to the binding of sig-
naling molecules by forming dimers and then adding phosphate 
groups to tyrosines on the cytoplasmic part of the other mono-
mer making up the dimer. Relay proteins in the cell can then be 
activated by binding to different phosphorylated tyrosines, allow-
ing this receptor to trigger several pathways at once. (3) Ligand-
gated ion channels open or close in response to binding by 
specific signaling molecules, regulating the flow of specific ions 
across the membrane.
• The activity of all three types of receptors is crucial; abnormal 
GPCRs and RTKs are associated with many human diseases.
• Intracellular receptors are cytoplasmic or nuclear proteins. 
Signaling molecules that are hydrophobic or small enough to cross 
the plasma membrane bind to these receptors inside the cell.
? How are the structures of a GPCR and an RTK similar? How does 
initiation of signal transduction differ for these two types of receptors?
CONCEPT 9.3
Signal transduction: Cascades of molecular 
interactions transmit signals from receptors to relay 
molecules in the cell (pp. 223–227)
• At each step in a signal transduction pathway, the signal is trans-
duced into a different form, which commonly involves a shape 
change in a protein. Many signal transduction pathways include 
phosphorylation cascades, in which a series of protein 
kinases each add a phosphate group to the next one in line, ac-
tivating it. Enzymes called protein phosphatases remove the 
phosphate groups. The balance between phosphorylation and 
dephosphorylation regulates the activity of proteins involved in 
the sequential steps of a signal transduction pathway.
• Second messengers, such as the small molecule cyclic AMP 
(cAMP) and the ion Ca2+, diffuse readily through the cytosol and 
thus help broadcast signals quickly. Many G proteins activate  
adenylyl cyclase, which makes cAMP from ATP . Cells use Ca2+ 
as a second messenger in GPCR and RTK pathways. The tyrosine 
kinase pathways can also involve two other second messengers, 
diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). 
IP3 can trigger a subsequent increase in Ca2+ level.
? What is the difference between a protein kinase and a second 
messenger? Can both operate in the same signal transduction pathway?
CONCEPT 9.4
Cellular response: Cell signaling leads to regulation  
of transcription or cytoplasmic activities (pp. 228–231)
• Some pathways lead to a nuclear response: Specific genes are 
turned on or off by activated transcription factors. In others, the 
response involves cytoplasmic regulation.
• Cellular responses are not simply on or off; they are regulated at 
many steps. Each protein in a signaling pathway amplifies the sig-
nal by activating multiple copies of the next component; for long 
pathways, the total amplification may be over a millionfold. The 
combination of proteins in a cell confers specificity in the signals 
it detects and the responses it carries out. Scaffolding proteins 
increase signaling efficiency. Pathway branching further helps 
the cell coordinate signals and responses. Signal response can be 
terminated quickly because ligand binding is reversible.
? What mechanisms in the cell terminate its response to a signal and 
maintain its ability to respond to new signals?
CONCEPT 9.5
Apoptosis requires integration of multiple  
cell-signaling pathways (pp. 231–233)
• Apoptosis is a type of programmed cell death in which cell 
components are disposed of in an orderly fashion. Studies of the 
soil worm Caenorhabditis elegans clarified molecular details of the 
relevant signaling pathways. A death signal leads to activation of 
caspases and nucleases, the main enzymes involved in apoptosis.
• Several apoptotic signaling pathways with related proteins exist 
in the cells of humans and other mammals, triggered in different 
ways. Signals eliciting apoptosis can originate from outside or 
inside the cell.
? What is an explanation for the similarities between genes in yeasts, 
nematodes, and mammals that control apoptosis?
234 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
9 Chapter Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   234 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 236 ===

 CHAPTER 9  Cellular Signaling 235
regulated process of apoptosis is not simply the destruction of 
a cell; it is also an emergent property. Write a short essay (about 
100–150 words) that briefly explains the role of apoptosis 
in the development and proper functioning of an animal, 
and describe how this form of programmed cell death is a 
process that emerges from the orderly integration of signaling 
pathways.
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
There are five basic tastes—sour, salty, sweet, bitter, and 
“umami.” Salt is detected when the concentration of salt 
outside of a taste bud cell is higher than that inside of it, 
and ion channels allow the passive leakage of Na+ into 
the cell. The resulting change in membrane potential (see 
Concept 8.4) sends the “salty” signal to the brain. Umami is 
a savory taste generated by glutamate (glutamic acid, found 
in monosodium glutamate, or MSG), which is used as a flavor 
enhancer in foods such as taco-flavored tortilla chips. The 
glutamate receptor is a GPCR, which, when bound, initiates 
a signaling pathway that ends with a cellular response, 
perceived by you as “taste.” If you eat a regular potato chip 
and then rinse your mouth, you will no longer taste salt. 
But if you eat a flavored tortilla chip and then rinse, the 
taste persists. (Try it!) Propose a possible explanation for this 
difference.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. DRAW IT Draw the following apoptotic pathway, which 
operates in human immune cells. A death signal is received when 
a molecule called Fas binds its cell-surface receptor. The binding 
of many Fas molecules to receptors causes receptor clustering. 
The intracellular regions of the receptors, when together, bind 
proteins called adaptor proteins. These in turn bind to inactive 
molecules of caspase-8, which become activated and then 
activate caspase-3. Once activated, caspase-3 initiates apoptosis.
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Identify the evolutionary 
mechanisms that might account for the origin and persistence 
of cell-to-cell signaling systems in prokaryotes.
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Epinephrine initiates a signal 
transduction pathway that produces cyclic AMP (cAMP) and 
leads to the breakdown of glycogen to glucose, a major energy 
source for cells. But glycogen breakdown is only part of the 
fight-or-flight response that epinephrine brings about; the 
overall effect on the body includes an increase in heart rate and 
alertness, as well as a burst of energy. Given that caffeine blocks 
the activity of cAMP phosphodiesterase, propose a mechanism 
by which caffeine ingestion leads to heightened alertness and 
sleeplessness.
11. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY The aging 
process is thought to be initiated at the cellular level. Among 
the changes that can occur after a certain number of cell 
divisions is the loss of a cell’s ability to respond to growth 
factors and other signals. Much research into aging is aimed 
at understanding such losses, with the ultimate goal of 
extending the human life span. Not everyone, however, 
agrees that this is a desirable goal. If life expectancy were 
greatly increased, discuss what might be the social and 
ecological consequences.
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION The properties 
of life emerge at the biological level of the cell. The highly 
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C09_PRF.indd   235 3/14/20   2:07 AM

=== SIDE 237 ===

Figure 10.1 This hoary marmot (Marmota caligata) obtains energy for its cells by 
feeding on plants. In the process of cellular respiration, mitochondria in the cells 
of animals, plants, and other organisms break down organic molecules, generating 
ATP and waste products: carbon dioxide, water, and heat. Note that energy flows 
one way, but chemicals are recycled.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 10
• BioFlix® Animation: Cellular Respiration
• Figure 10.12 Walkthrough: Free-Energy 
Change During Electron Transport
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Glycolysis
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Cellular Respiration: 
Inputs and Outputs
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• Oxidative Phosphorylation (Concept 10.4)
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Draw a cell 
with a large mitochondrion, labeling 
the parts of the mitochondrion. As you 
go through the 
chapter, add key 
reactions for each 
stage of cellular 
respiration, 
linking the stages 
together. Label the 
carbon molecule(s) 
with the most 
energy and the carbon molecule(s) with 
the least energy. Your cell can be a simple 
sketch, as shown here.
10.1 Catabolic pathways yield energy by 
oxidizing organic fuels p. 237
10.2 Glycolysis harvests chemical energy by 
oxidizing glucose to pyruvate p .  2 4 2
10.3  After pyruvate is oxidized, the citric acid 
cycle completes the energy-yielding 
oxidation of organic molecules p .  2 4 3
10.4 During oxidative phosphorylation, 
chemiosmosis couples electron 
transport to ATP synthesis p. 246
10.5 Fermentation and anaerobic 
respiration enable cells to produce 
ATP without the use of oxygen p .  2 5 1
10.6 Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle 
connect to many other metabolic 
pathways p. 254
KEY CONCEPTS
Cell Respiration10
Mitochondrion
ATP
Light
energy
powers most
cellular work
Photosynthesis
Plant cell Animal cell
Heat
Cellular respiration in mitochondria
CO2 + H2O Organic
molecules + O2
How is the chemical energy stored in food used to 
generate ATP, the molecule that drives most cellular work?
used in
used ingenerates
generates
breaks down organic 
molecules,generating
236
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   236 14/03/20   5:30 AM

=== SIDE 238 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 237
However, it originated as a synonym for aerobic respiration 
because of the relationship of that process to organismal 
respiration, in which an animal breathes in oxygen. Thus, 
 cellular respiration is often used to refer to the aerobic process, 
a practice we follow in most of this chapter.
Although very different in mechanism, aerobic respira-
tion is in principle similar to the combustion of gasoline in 
an automobile engine after oxygen is mixed with the fuel 
(hydrocarbons). Food provides the fuel for respiration, and 
the exhaust is carbon dioxide and water. The overall process 
can be summarized as follows:
Organic
compounds  +  Oxygen  S  Carbon
dioxide  +  Water  +  Energy
Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins from food can all be pro-
cessed and consumed as fuel. In animal diets, a major source 
of carbohydrates is starch, a storage polysaccharide that can 
be broken down into glucose (C6H12O6) subunits. Here, we 
will learn the steps of cellular respiration by tracking the 
degradation of the sugar glucose:
C6H12O6+6 O2S6 CO2+6 H2O+Energy (ATP+heat)
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Introduction to 
 C e l l u l a r ! R e s p i r a t i o n
This breakdown of glucose is exergonic, having a free-
energy change of -686 kcal (-2,870 kJ) per mole of glucose 
decomposed (/uni2206G=-686 kcal/mol). Recall that a negative 
/uni2206G1/uni2206G602 indicates that the products of the chemical 
process store less energy than the reactants and that the reac-
tion can happen spontaneously—in other words, without an 
input of energy (see Concept 6.2).
Catabolic pathways do not directly move flagella, pump 
solutes across membranes, polymerize monomers, or per-
form other cellular work. Catabolism is linked to work by a 
chemical drive shaft—ATP (see Concept 6.3). To keep work-
ing, the cell must regenerate its supply of ATP from ADP and 
~P i (see Figure 6.12). To understand how cellular respiration 
accomplishes this, let’s examine the fundamental chemical 
processes known as oxidation and reduction.
Redox Reactions: Oxidation and Reduction
How do the catabolic pathways that decompose glucose 
and other organic fuels yield energy? The answer is based on 
the transfer of electrons during the chemical reactions. The 
relocation of electrons releases energy stored in organic mol-
ecules, and this energy ultimately is used to synthesize ATP.
The Principle of Redox
In many chemical reactions, there is a transfer of one or more 
electrons (e-) from one reactant to another. These electron 
transfers are called oxidation-reduction reactions, or redox 
reactions for short. In a redox reaction, the loss of electrons 
Catabolic pathways yield energy 
 by oxidizing organic fuels
Living cells require transfusions of energy from outside sources 
to perform their many tasks—for example, assembling poly-
mers, pumping substances across membranes, moving, and 
reproducing. The outside source of energy is food, and the 
energy stored in the organic molecules of food ultimately comes 
from the sun. As shown in Figure!10.1, energy flows into an 
ecosystem as sunlight and exits as heat; in contrast, the chemical 
elements essential to life are recycled. Photosynthesis generates 
oxygen, as well as organic molecules used by the mitochondria 
of eukaryotes as fuel for cellular respiration. Respiration breaks 
this fuel down, using oxygen (O2) and generating ATP. The 
waste products of this type of respiration, carbon dioxide (CO2) 
and water (H2O), are the raw materials for photosynthesis.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Energy Flow  
and Chemical Recycling
Let’s consider how cells harvest the chemical energy stored 
in organic molecules and use it to generate ATP, the molecule 
that drives most cellular work. Metabolic pathways that release 
stored energy by breaking down complex molecules are called 
catabolic pathways (see Concept 6.1). Transfer of electrons 
from food molecules (like glucose) to other molecules plays a 
major role in these pathways. In this section, we consider these 
processes, which are central to cellular respiration.
Catabolic Pathways and Production of ATP
Organic compounds possess potential energy as a result 
of the arrangement of electrons in the bonds between 
their atoms. Compounds that can participate in exergonic 
reactions can act as fuels. Through the activity of enzymes 
(see Concept 6.4), a cell systematically degrades complex 
organic molecules that are rich in potential energy to 
simpler waste products that have less energy. Some of the 
energy taken out of chemical storage can be used to do work; 
the rest is dissipated as heat.
One catabolic process, fermentation, is a partial degra-
dation of sugars or other organic fuel that occurs without the 
use of oxygen. However, the most efficient catabolic pathway 
is aerobic respiration, in which oxygen is consumed as 
a reactant along with the organic fuel (aerobic is from the 
Greek aer, air, and bios, life). The cells of most eukaryotic and 
many prokaryotic organisms can carry out aerobic respira-
tion. Some prokaryotes use substances other than oxygen as 
reactants in a similar process that harvests chemical energy 
without oxygen; this process is called anaerobic respiration (the 
prefix an- means “without”). Technically, the term cellular 
respiration includes both aerobic and anaerobic processes. 
CONCEPT 10.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   237 14/03/20   5:30 AM

=== SIDE 239 ===

238 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
burning (oxidation) of methane, therefore releases chemical 
energy that can be put to work.
Oxidation of Organic Fuel Molecules  
During Cellular Respiration
The oxidation of methane by O2 is the main combustion 
reaction that occurs at the burner of a gas stove. The com-
bustion of gasoline in an automobile engine is also a redox 
reaction; the energy released pushes the pistons. But the 
energy- yielding redox process of greatest interest to biologists 
is respiration: the oxidation of glucose and other molecules in 
food. Examine again the summary equation for cellular respi-
ration, but this time think of it as a redox process:
becomes oxidized
C6H12O6 6 O2 6 CO2 6 H2O Energy
becomes reduced
111
As in the combustion of methane or gasoline, the fuel (glu-
cose) is oxidized and O2 is reduced. The electrons lose poten-
tial energy along the way, and energy is released.
In general, organic molecules that have an abundance of 
hydrogen are excellent fuels because their bonds are a source 
of “hilltop” electrons, whose energy may be released as these 
electrons “fall” down an energy gradient during their transfer 
to oxygen. The summary equation for respiration indicates 
that hydrogen is transferred from glucose to the O atoms in 
O2. But the important point, not visible in the summary equa-
tion, is that the energy state of the electron changes as hydro-
gen (with its electron) is transferred to oxygen. In respiration, 
the oxidation of glucose transfers electrons to a lower energy 
state, liberating energy that becomes available for ATP syn-
thesis. So, in general, we see fuels with multiple C¬H bonds 
oxidized into products with multiple C¬O bonds.
from one substance is called oxidation, and the addition of 
electrons to another substance is known as reduction. (Note 
that adding electrons is called reduction; adding negatively 
charged electrons to an atom reduces the amount of positive 
charge of that atom.)
To take a simple, nonbiological example, consider the 
reaction between the elements sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) 
that forms table salt:
becomes oxidized
(loses electron)
Na Cl Na+ Cl–
becomes reduced
(gains electron)
11
We could generalize a redox reaction this way:
becomes oxidized
Xe– Y X11 Ye–
becomes reduced
In the generalized reaction, substance Xe-, the electron donor, 
is called the reducing agent; it reduces Y, which accepts the 
donated electron. Substance Y, the electron acceptor, is the 
 oxidizing agent; it oxidizes Xe- by removing its electron. 
Because an electron transfer requires both an electron donor and 
an acceptor, oxidation and reduction always go hand in hand.
Not all redox reactions involve the complete transfer of elec-
trons from one substance to another; some change the degree 
of electron sharing in covalent bonds. Methane combustion, 
shown in Figure 10.2, is an example. The covalent electrons in 
methane are shared nearly equally between the bonded atoms 
because carbon and hydrogen have about the same affinity for 
valence electrons; they are about equally electronegative (see 
Concept 2.3). But when methane reacts with O2, forming CO2,  
electrons end up shared less equally between the carbon atom 
and its new covalent partners, the oxygen atoms, which are 
very electronegative. In effect, the carbon atom has partially 
“lost” its shared electrons; thus, methane has been oxidized.
Now let’s examine the fate of the reactant O2. The two 
atoms of O2 share their electrons equally. But after the reac-
tion with methane, when each O atom is bonded to two H 
atoms in H2O, the electrons of those covalent bonds spend 
more time near the oxygen (see Figure 10.2). In effect, each O 
atom has partially “gained” electrons, so the oxygen molecule 
(O2) has been reduced. Because the O atom is so electronega-
tive, O2 is one of the most powerful of all oxidizing agents.
Energy must be added to pull an electron away from an 
atom, just as energy is required to push a ball uphill. The more 
electronegative the atom (the stronger its pull on electrons), 
the more energy is required to take an electron away from it. 
An electron loses potential energy when it shifts from a less 
electronegative atom toward a more electronegative one, just 
as a ball loses potential energy when it rolls downhill. A redox 
reaction that moves electrons closer to an O atom, such as the 
C
H
H
HH O O O C O H O H
Methane
(reducing
agent)
CH4 2 O2 CO2 Energy+ 2 H2O++
Oxygen
(oxidizing
agent)
Reactants Products
becomes oxidized
becomes reduced
Carbon dioxide Water
. Figure 10.2 Methane combustion as an energy-yielding redox 
reaction. The reaction releases energy to the surroundings because the 
electrons lose potential energy when they end up being shared unequally, 
spending more time near electronegative atoms such as oxygen.
VISUAL SKILLS Is the carbon atom oxidized or reduced during this 
reaction? Explain.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Redox Reactions
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   238 14/03/20   5:30 AM

=== SIDE 240 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 239
from the substrate (glucose, in the preceding example), 
thereby oxidizing it. The enzyme delivers the 2 electrons 
along with 1 proton to its coenzyme, NAD+, forming NADH 
(Figure 10.3). The other proton is released as a hydrogen ion 
(H+) into the surrounding solution:
H OH 1 NAD+ O 1 NADH 1 H+Dehydrogenase
CC
By receiving 2 negatively charged electrons but only 1 posi-
tively charged proton, the nicotinamide portion of NAD+ has 
its charge neutralized when NAD+ is reduced to NADH. The 
name NADH shows the hydrogen that has been received in 
the reaction. NAD+ is the most versatile electron acceptor in 
cellular respiration and functions in several of the redox steps 
during the breakdown of glucose.
Electrons lose very little of their potential energy when 
they are transferred from glucose to NAD+. Each NADH mol-
ecule formed during respiration represents stored energy that 
can be tapped to make ATP when the electrons complete their 
“fall” down an energy gradient from NADH to O2.
How do electrons that are extracted from glucose and 
stored as potential energy in NADH finally reach oxygen? 
It will help to compare the redox chemistry of cellular res-
piration to a much simpler reaction: the reaction between 
hydrogen and oxygen to form water (Figure 10.4a). Mix H2 
and O2, provide a spark for activation energy, and the gases 
combine explosively. In fact, combustion of liquid H2 and 
O2 is harnessed to help power the rocket engines that boost 
satellites into orbit and launch spacecraft. The explosion 
represents a release of energy as the electrons of hydrogen 
“fall” closer to the electronegative oxygen atoms. Cellular 
respiration also brings hydrogen and oxygen together to 
form water, but there are two important differences. First, in 
cellular respiration, the hydrogen that reacts with oxygen 
The main energy-yielding foods—carbohydrates and fats—
are reservoirs of electrons associated with hydrogen, often in 
the form of C¬H bonds. Only the barrier of activation energy 
holds back the flood of electrons to a lower energy state  
(see Figure 6.13). Without this barrier, a food substance like 
glucose would combine almost instantaneously with O2.  
If we supply the activation energy by igniting glucose, it burns 
in air, releasing 686 kcal (2,870 kJ) of heat per mole of glucose 
(about 180 g). Body temperature is not high enough to initi-
ate burning, of course. Instead, if you swallow some glucose, 
enzymes in your cells will lower the barrier of activation 
energy, allowing the sugar to be oxidized in a series of steps.
Stepwise Energy Harvest via NAD/uni002B.bold  
and the Electron Transport Chain
If energy is released from a fuel all at once, it cannot be 
harnessed efficiently for constructive work. For example, 
if a gasoline tank explodes, it cannot drive a car very far. 
Cellular respiration does not oxidize glucose (or any other 
organic fuel) in a single explosive step either. Rather, glucose 
is broken down in a series of steps, each one catalyzed by an 
enzyme. At key steps, electrons are stripped from the glucose. 
As is often the case in oxidation reactions, each electron 
travels with a proton—thus, as a hydrogen atom. The hydro-
gen atoms are not transferred directly to O2, but instead are 
usually passed first to an electron carrier, a coenzyme called 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, a derivative of the vita-
min niacin. This coenzyme is well suited as an electron carrier 
because it can cycle easily between its oxidized form, NAD1, 
and its reduced form, NADH. As an electron acceptor, NAD+ 
functions as an oxidizing agent during respiration.
How does NAD+ trap electrons from glucose and the other 
organic molecules in food? Enzymes called dehydrogenases 
remove a pair of hydrogen atoms (2 electrons and 2 protons) 
NH2
O
C 2 H
(from food)
+
2 e– + 2 H+
2 e– + H+
H+
H+
O–
O–
O
O
Nicotinamide
(oxidized form)
Nicotinamide
(reduced form)
CH2
CH2
H H
H
HO
H
OH
O
NH2
N
N
H
HO OH
O
N+
N H
N
O
O
O
P
P
H
NAD+
NH2
O
C
H
N
H
NADH
Oxidation of NADH
Reduction of NAD+
Dehydrogenase
+
m Figure 10.3 NAD/uni002B.bold as an electron shuttle. The full name for NAD+,  
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, describes its structure—the molecule consists  
of two nucleotides joined together at their phosphate groups (shown in yellow).  
(Nicotinamide is a nitrogenous base, although not one that is present in DNA or  
RNA; see Figure 5.23.) The enzymatic transfer of 2 electrons and 1 proton (H+) from  
an organic molecule in food to NAD+ reduces the NAD+ to NADH: Most of the  
electrons removed from food are transferred initially to NAD+, forming NADH.
VISUAL SKILLS 
Describe the structural 
differences between 
the oxidized form and 
the reduced form of 
nicotinamide.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   239 14/03/20   5:30 AM

=== SIDE 241 ===

240 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
pulls electrons down the chain in an energy-yielding tumble 
analogous to gravity pulling objects downhill.
In summary, during cellular respiration, most electrons 
travel the following “downhill” route: glucose S NADH S 
electron transport chain S oxygen. Later in this chapter, you 
will learn more about how the cell uses the energy released 
from this exergonic electron fall to regenerate its supply of 
ATP. For now, having covered the basic redox mechanisms of 
cellular respiration, let’s look at the entire process by which 
energy is harvested from organic fuels.
The Stages of Cellular Respiration: A Preview
The harvesting of energy from glucose by cellular respiration is 
a cumulative function of three metabolic stages. We list them 
here along with a color-coding scheme we will use throughout 
the chapter to help you keep track of the big picture:
GLYCOLYSIS (color-coded blue throughout the chapter)1.
PYRUVATE OXIDATION (light orange) and the
CITRIC ACID CYCLE (dark orange)
2.
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION: Electron transport and
chemiosmosis (purple)
3.
Biochemists usually reserve the term cellular respiration for 
stages 2 and 3 together. In this text, however, we include gly-
colysis as a part of cellular respiration because most respiring 
cells deriving energy from glucose use glycolysis to produce 
the starting material for the citric acid cycle.
As diagrammed in Figure 10.5, gly-
colysis and then pyruvate oxidation 
and the citric acid cycle are the catabolic 
pathways that break down glucose and 
other organic fuels. Glycolysis, which 
occurs in the cytosol, begins the degrada-
tion process by breaking glucose into two 
molecules of a compound called pyruvate. 
In eukaryotes, pyruvate enters the mito-
chondrion and is oxidized to a compound 
called acetyl CoA, which enters the citric 
acid cycle. There, the breakdown of 
glucose to carbon dioxide is completed. 
(In prokaryotes, these processes take place 
in the cytosol.) Thus, the carbon dioxide 
produced by respiration represents frag-
ments of oxidized organic molecules.
Some of the steps of glycolysis and 
the citric acid cycle are redox reactions in 
which dehydrogenases transfer electrons 
from substrates to NAD+ or the related 
electron carrier FAD, forming NADH or 
FADH2. (You’ll learn more about FAD and 
FADH2 later.) In the third stage of respira-
tion, the electron transport chain accepts 
is derived from organic molecules rather than H2. Second, 
instead of occurring in one explosive reaction, respiration 
uses an electron transport chain to break the fall of electrons 
to oxygen into several energy-releasing steps (Figure 10.4b). 
An electron transport chain consists of a number of 
molecules, mostly proteins, built into the inner membrane 
of the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells (and the plasma 
membrane of respiring prokaryotes). Electrons removed 
from glucose are shuttled by NADH to the “top,” higher-
energy end of the chain. At the “bottom,” lower-energy end, 
O2 captures these electrons along with hydrogen nuclei (H+),  
forming water. (Anaerobically respiring prokaryotes have 
an electron acceptor at the end of the chain that is different 
from O2.)
Electron transfer from NADH to oxygen is an exergonic reac-
tion with a free-energy change of -53 kcal/mol (-222 kJ/mol).  
Instead of this energy being released and wasted in a single 
explosive step, electrons cascade down the chain from one car-
rier molecule to the next in a series of redox reactions, losing a 
small amount of energy with each step until they finally reach 
oxygen, the terminal electron acceptor, which has a very great 
affinity for electrons. Each “downhill” carrier has a greater affin-
ity for electrons than, and is thus capable of accepting electrons 
from (oxidizing), its “uphill” neighbor, with O2 at the bottom 
of the chain. Therefore, the electrons transferred from glucose 
to NAD+, reducing it to NADH, fall down an energy gradient 
in the electron transport chain to a far more stable location in 
an electronegative oxygen atom from O2. Put another way, O2 
Explosive
release of
heat and light
energy
ATP
ATP
ATP
Free energy, G
Free energy, G
(from food via NADH)
2 H+ 2 e–
2 H+
2 e–
Controlled
release of
energy for
synthesis of
ATP
+
H2   + 2 H +O2
1/2
H2O H2O
O2
1/2
Electron transport
chain
12O2
(a) Uncontrolled reaction. 
The one-step exergonic reaction 
of hydrogen with oxygen to 
form water releases a large 
amount of energy in the form 
of heat and light: an explosion.
(b) Cellular respiration. In cellular respiration, the
same reaction occurs in stages: An electron
transport chain breaks the “fall” of electrons in this
reaction into a series of smaller steps and stores
some of the released energy in a form that can be
used to make ATP . (The rest of the energy is
released as heat.)
. Figure 10.4 An introduction to electron transport chains.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   240 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 242 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 241
occurs when an enzyme transfers a phosphate group from a 
substrate molecule to ADP, rather than adding an inorganic 
phosphate to ADP as in oxidative phosphorylation. “Substrate 
molecule” here refers to an organic molecule generated as 
an intermediate during the catabolism of glucose. You’ll see 
examples of substrate-level phosphorylation later in the chap-
ter, in both glycolysis and the citric acid cycle.
You can think of the whole process this way: When you 
withdraw a relatively large sum of money from an ATM, it is not 
delivered to you in a single bill of a large denomination. Instead, 
the machine dispenses a number of smaller-denomination 
bills that you can spend more easily. This is analogous to ATP 
production during cellular respiration. For each molecule of 
glucose degraded to CO2 and H2O by respiration, the cell makes 
up to about 32 molecules of ATP, each with 7.3 kcal/mol of free 
energy. Respiration cashes in the large denomination of energy 
banked in a single molecule of glucose (686 kcal/mol under 
standard conditions) for the small change of many molecules of 
ATP, which is more practical for the cell to spend on its work.
This preview has introduced you to how glycolysis, the 
citric acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation fit into the 
process of cellular respiration so you can keep the big pic-
ture in mind as you take a closer look at each of these three 
stages of respiration. As you read about the chemical reac-
tions, remember that each reaction is catalyzed by a specific 
enzyme, some of which are shown in Figure 7.32b.
electrons from NADH or FADH2 generated during the first 
two stages and passes these electrons down the chain. At the 
end of the chain, the electrons are combined with molecular 
oxygen (O2) and hydrogen ions (H+), forming water (see Figure 
10.4b). The energy released at each step of the chain is stored 
in a form the mitochondrion (or prokaryotic cell) can use to 
make ATP from!ADP. This mode of ATP synthesis is called 
 oxidative phosphorylation because it is powered by the 
redox  reactions of the electron transport chain.
In eukaryotic cells, the inner membrane of the mitochon-
drion is the site of electron transport and another process 
called chemiosmosis, together making up oxidative phosphory-
lation. (In prokaryotes, these processes take place in the plasma 
membrane.) Oxidative phosphorylation accounts for almost 
90% of the ATP generated by respiration. A smaller amount 
of ATP is formed directly in a few reactions of glycolysis and 
the citric acid cycle by a mechanism called  substrate-level 
 p h o s p h o r y l a t i o n (Figure 10.6). This mode of ATP synthesis 
ATPATP ATP
Electrons carried 
via NADH 
and FADH2
Electrons carried 
via NADH
CYTOSOL MITOCHONDRION
GLYCOLYSIS
Glucose Pyruvate
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION
Acetyl CoA
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
OXIDATIVE
PHOSPHORYLATION
(Electron transport 
and chemiosmosis)
Substrate-level 
phosphorylation
Substrate-level 
phosphorylation
Oxidative 
phosphorylation
c Figure 10.5 An overview of cellular 
respiration. During glycolysis, each glucose 
molecule is broken down into two molecules 
of pyruvate. In eukaryotic cells, as shown 
here, the pyruvate enters the mitochondrion. 
There it is oxidized to acetyl CoA, which will 
be further oxidized to CO2 in the citric acid 
cycle. The electron carriers NADH and FADH2 
transfer electrons derived from glucose to 
electron transport chains. During oxidative 
phosphorylation, electron transport chains 
convert the chemical energy to a form 
used for ATP synthesis in the process called 
chemiosmosis. (During earlier steps of cellular 
respiration, a few molecules of ATP are 
synthesized in a process called substrate-level 
phosphorylation.) To visualize these processes 
in their cellular context, see Figure 7.32b.
Product
Substrate
Enzyme Enzyme
P
ATP
ADP
. Figure 10.6 Substrate-level phosphorylation. Some ATP 
is made by direct transfer of a phosphate group from an organic 
substrate to ADP by an enzyme. (For examples in glycolysis, see 
Figure!10.8, steps 7 and 10.)
 Mastering Biology Animation: Overview 
of Cellular Respiration
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 6.9. In the reaction shown 
above, is the potential energy higher for the reactants or for the 
products? Explain.
CONCEPT CHECK 10.1
1. Compare and contrast aerobic and anaerobic respiration, 
including the processes involved.
2. WHAT IF? If the following reaction occurred, which com-
pound would be oxidized? Reduced?
C4H6O4+FADS C4H4O4+FADH2
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   241 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 243 ===

242 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Glycolysis harvests chemical energy 
by oxidizing glucose to pyruvate
The word glycolysis means “sugar splitting,” and that is 
exactly what happens during this pathway. Glucose, a six-
carbon sugar, is split into two three-carbon sugars. These 
smaller sugars are then oxidized and their remaining atoms 
rearranged to form two molecules of pyruvate. (Pyruvate is 
the ionized form of pyruvic acid.)
As summarized in Figure 10.7, glycolysis can be divided 
into two phases: the energy investment phase and the energy 
payoff phase. During the energy investment phase, the cell 
actually spends ATP. This investment is repaid with inter-
est during the energy payoff phase, when ATP is produced 
by substrate-level phosphorylation and NAD+ is reduced to 
NADH by electrons released from the oxidation of glucose. 
The net energy yield from glycolysis, per glucose molecule, is 
2 ATP plus 2 NADH. The ten steps of the glycolytic pathway 
are shown in Figure 10.8.
All of the carbon originally present in glucose is 
accounted for in the two molecules of pyruvate; no carbon is 
released as CO2 during glycolysis. Glycolysis occurs whether 
or not O2 is present. However, if O2 is present, the chemi-
cal energy stored in pyruvate and NADH can be extracted 
by pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and oxidative 
phosphorylation.
Glucose
Energy Investment Phase
GLYCOLYSIS:
Energy Payoff Phase
Net Inputs and Outputs
2 ADP + 2
2 Pyruvate + 2 H2O
2    ATP used
 formed
+ 2 H+
4    ATP
2   NADH
4 ATP formed – 2 ATP used
Glucose
 
2 NAD+ +  4 e– + 4 H+
2 Pyruvate + 2 H2O
2 ATP
2 NADH + 2 H+
P
4 ADP + 4P
2 NAD+ + 4 e– + 4 H+
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
. Figure 10.7 The inputs and outputs of glycolysis.CONCEPT 10.2
Glucose
ATP
ADP ADP
ATPFructose
6-phosphate
H
H
HO
H
CH2OH
O
OHOH
H
Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate
Glucose
6-phosphate
OHH
H
HO
H O
OHOH H
OH
H
H
CH2O P
O
HO H
OH
OCH2
H
H HO
CH2OH P CH2OCH2O
O
HO H
OHH
H HO
P P
Phosphogluco-
isomerase
Phospho-
fructokinase
CH2O
CO
CH2OH
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (DHAP)
CH2O
CHOH
HC O
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (G3P)
P
P
Aldolase
Isomerase
Hexokinase
Glucose 6-
phosphate is
converted to
fructose
6-phosphate.
Phosphofructokinase
transfers a phosphate
group from ATP to the
opposite end of the
sugar, investing a second
molecule of ATP. This is
a key step for regulation
of glycolysis.
1
2 3
5
4
GLYCOLYSIS: Energy Investment Phase
Aldolase cleaves 
the sugar 
molecule into 
two different 
three-carbon 
sugars.
Conversion between DHAP 
and G3P: This reaction 
never reaches equilibrium; 
G3P is used in the next step 
as fast as it forms.
Hexokinase transfers
a phosphate group 
from ATP to glucose, 
making it more 
chemically reactive. 
The charged 
phosphate also traps 
the sugar in the cell.
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
. Figure 10.8 The steps of glycolysis. Glycolysis, a source of ATP and NADH, takes place in 
the cytosol. Two of the enzymes (in steps 1 and 3) are shown in Figure 7.32b.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Glycolysis
WHAT IF? What would happen if you removed the dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate generated in step 4 as fast as it was produced?
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   242 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 244 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 243
1. VISUAL SKILLS During the redox reaction in glycolysis (see 
step 6 in Figure 10.8), which one of the molecules acts as the 
oxidizing agent? The reducing agent?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
CH3
O–
C CH3
O
C
Coenzyme A
Acetyl CoA
O
S-CoA
CO
NADH+ H+NAD+
Pyruvate
Transport protein
2
31
CO2
CYTOSOL
MITOCHONDRION
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
10 nm
. Figure 10.9 Oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the step 
before the citric acid cycle. Pyruvate enters the mitochondrion 
through a transport protein and is processed by a complex of 
several enzymes known as pyruvate dehydrogenase (shown in 
the computer-generated image based on cryo-EMs). This complex 
catalyzes the three numbered steps, which are described in the 
text. The CO2 molecule will diffuse out of the cell. The NADH will 
be used in oxidative phosphorylation. The acetyl group of acetyl 
CoA will enter the citric acid cycle. (Coenzyme A is abbreviated 
S-CoA when it is attached to a molecule, emphasizing its sulfur 
atom, S.)
O
CHOH
CO
CH2O
P
P
1,3-Bisphospho-
glycerate
2
2 NAD+ + 2 H+
Triose 
phosphate
dehydrogenase
2Pi
2 ADP
ATP
2 ADP
Phospho-
glycerokinase
3-Phospho-
glycerate
2
CO
CHOH
CH2O
O–
CO
CH2
O–
P
2
Phospho-
glyceromutase
2-Phospho-
glycerate
CO
C
CH2OH
OH
O–
P
2 H2O
Enolase
Phosphoenol-
pyruvate (PEP)
CO P
2
Pyruvate
CO
C
CH3
O
O–
Pyruvate 
kinase
2
The energy payoff phase occurs after glucose is split into two three-carbon
sugars. Thus, the coefficient 2 precedes all molecules in this phase.
GLYCOLYSIS: Energy Payoff Phase
This enzyme
relocates the
remaining
phosphate
group.
The phosphate
group is transferred
from PEP to ADP
(a second example
of substrate-level
phosphorylation),
forming pyruvate.
7 8
9
10
6
Two sequential reactions: 
(1) G3P is oxidized by the 
transfer of electrons to 
NAD+, forming NADH.
(2) Using energy from this 
exergonic redox reaction,  
a phosphate group is 
attached to the oxidized 
substrate, making a 
high-energy product.  
The phosphate group is 
transferred to ADP 
(substrate-level 
phosphorylation) in an 
exergonic reaction. The 
carbonyl group of G3P 
has been oxidized to 
the carboxyl group
(—COO–) of an organic 
acid (3-phosphoglycerate). 
Enolase causes a 
double bond to form 
in the substrate by 
extracting a water 
molecule, yielding 
phosphoenolpyruvate 
(PEP), a compound 
with a very high 
potential energy.
2  NADH
 2 ATP2 
 Mastering Biology  B i o F l i x®  
Animation: Glycolysis
CONCEPT CHECK 10.2
CONCEPT 10.3
After pyruvate is oxidized,  
the citric acid cycle completes 
the energy-yielding oxidation  
of organic molecules
Glycolysis releases less than a quarter of the chemical energy in 
glucose that can be harvested by cells; most of the energy remains 
stockpiled in the two molecules of pyruvate. When O2 is present, 
the pyruvate in eukaryotic cells enters a mitochondrion, where 
the oxidation of glucose is completed. In aerobically respiring 
prokaryotic cells, this process occurs in the cytosol. (Later in the 
chapter, we’ll examine other fates for pyruvate—for example, 
when O2 is unavailable or in a prokaryote that is unable to use O2.)
Oxidation of Pyruvate to Acetyl CoA
Upon entering the mitochondrion via active transport, pyru-
vate is first converted to a compound called acetyl coenzyme A, 
or acetyl CoA (Figure 10.9). This step, linking glycolysis and 
the citric acid cycle, is carried out by a multienzyme complex 
that catalyzes three reactions: 1 Pyruvate’s carboxyl group  Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Acetyl CoA
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   243 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 245 ===

244 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
pyruvate is broken down to three CO2 molecules, includ-
ing the molecule of CO2 released during the conversion 
of pyruvate to acetyl CoA. The cycle generates 1 ATP per 
turn by substrate-level phosphorylation, but most of the 
chemical energy is transferred to NAD+ and FAD during 
the redox reactions. The reduced coenzymes, NADH and 
FADH2, shuttle their cargo of high-energy electrons into 
the electron transport chain. The citric acid cycle is also 
called the tricarboxylic acid cycle or the Krebs cycle, the 
latter honoring Hans Krebs. Krebs was the German-British 
scientist largely responsible for working out the pathway 
in the 1930s.
Now let’s look at the citric acid cycle in more detail. 
The!cycle has eight steps, each catalyzed by a specific 
enzyme. You can see in Figure 10.11 that for each turn of 
the!citric acid cycle, two carbons (red) enter in the relatively 
reduced form of an acetyl group (step 1), and two differ-
ent carbons (blue) leave in the completely oxidized form of 
CO2 molecules (steps 3 and 4). The acetyl group of acetyl 
CoA!joins the cycle by combining with the compound 
oxaloacetate, forming citrate (step 1). Citrate is the ion-
ized form of citric acid, for which the cycle is named. The 
next seven steps decompose the citrate back to oxaloac-
etate. It!is!this regeneration of oxaloacetate that makes the 
 p r o c e s s  a  cycle.
Referring to Figure 10.11, we can tally the energy-rich 
 m o l e c u l e s  p r o d u c e d  b y  t h e  c i t r i c  a c i d  c y c l e .  F o r  e a c h  a c e-
tyl group entering the cycle, 3 NAD+ are reduced to NADH 
(steps!3, 4, and 8). In step 6, electrons are transferred 
not to NAD+, but to FAD, which accepts 2 electrons and 
2 protons to become FADH2. In many animal tissue cells, 
the reaction in step 5 produces a guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP) molecule by substrate-level phosphorylation. GTP is 
a molecule similar to ATP in its structure and cellular func-
tion. This GTP may be used to make an ATP molecule (as 
shown) or directly power work in the cell. In the cells of 
plants, bacteria, and some animal tissues, step 5 forms an 
ATP molecule directly by substrate-level phosphorylation. 
The output from step 5 represents the only ATP generated 
during the citric acid cycle.!Recall that each glucose gives 
rise to two molecules of acetyl CoA that enter the cycle. 
Because the numbers noted earlier are obtained from a sin-
gle acetyl group entering the  pathway, the total yield per 
glucose from the citric acid cycle!turns out to be doubled, 
or 6 NADH, 2 FADH2, and the equivalent of!2 ATP.
Most of the ATP produced by respiration is generated later, 
from oxidative phosphorylation, when the NADH and FADH2 
produced by the citric acid cycle and earlier steps relay the 
electrons extracted from food to the electron transport chain. 
In the process, they supply the necessary energy for the phos-
phorylation of ADP to ATP. We will explore this process in 
the next section.
(¬COO-), already somewhat oxidized and thus carrying little 
chemical energy, is now fully oxidized and given off as a mol-
ecule of CO2. This is the first step in which CO2 is released dur-
ing respiration. 2 Next, the remaining two-carbon fragment is 
oxidized and the electrons transferred to NAD+, storing energy 
in the form of NADH. 3 Finally, coenzyme A (CoA), a sulfur-
containing compound derived from a B vitamin, is attached via 
its sulfur atom to the two-carbon intermediate, forming acetyl 
CoA. Acetyl CoA has a high potential energy, which is used to 
transfer the acetyl group to a molecule in the citric acid cycle, a 
reaction that is therefore highly exergonic.
The Citric Acid Cycle
The citric acid cycle functions as a metabolic furnace 
that  further oxidizes organic fuel derived from pyru-
vate. Figure!10.10 summarizes the inputs and outputs as 
CCC
CCC
CC
CC
C
PYRUVATE OXIDATION
CO2
CO2
NADH
FADH2
NAD+
2
Acetyl CoA
MITOCHONDRION
CYTOSOL
Pyruvate
(from glycolysis, 
2 molecules per glucose)
FAD
ADP +
CITRIC
ACID
CYCLE
ATP
+ 2 H+
+ H+
2 NAD+
NADH
Pi
CoA
CoA
2
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
+ H+
NADH
NAD+
CoA
. Figure 10.10 An overview of pyruvate oxidation and the 
citric acid cycle. The inputs and outputs per pyruvate molecule are 
shown with a focus on the carbon atoms involved. To calculate on 
a per-glucose basis, multiply by 2 because each glucose molecule is 
split during glycolysis into two pyruvate molecules.
 Mastering Biology Animation: The Citric Acid Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   244 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 246 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 245
CO2
CO2
CoA-SH
Acetyl CoA
Succinate
Succinyl
CoA
c-Ketoglutarate 
+ H+
NADH
NAD+
H2O
GTPGDP
ADP
ATP
+ H+
NADH
NAD+
H2O
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Fumarate
Isocitrate
Citrate
CITRIC
ACID
CYCLE
+ H+
NADH
NAD+
FAD
FADH2
CH3
OC
S-CoA
Two
hydrogens are
transferred to
FAD, forming  
FADH2 and
 oxidizing
succinate.
Addition of
a water 
molecule 
rearranges 
bonds in the 
substrate.
      The substrate
is oxidized,
reducing NAD+ to
NADH and
regenerating
oxaloacetate.
6
7
8
Pi
COO–
COO–
COO–HC
CH2
CH HOCOO–
COO–
COO–C
CH2
HO
CH2
COO–
COO–
CH2
OC
COO–
COO–
CH
CH2
HO
COO–
COO–
CH
HC
COO–
COO–
CH2
CH2
O
COO–
COO–
C
CH2
CH2
O
COO–
C
CH2
CH2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
CoA-SH
1     Acetyl CoA (from 
oxidation of pyruvate) 
adds its two-carbon acetyl 
group to oxaloacetate, 
producing citrate.
     Citrate is 
converted to 
its isomer, 
isocitrate, by 
removal of 
one water 
molecule and 
addition of 
another.
2
     Isocitrate
is oxidized, 
reducing
NAD+ to
NADH. Then 
the resulting 
compound
loses a CO2 
molecule.
3
     Another CO2
is lost, and the 
resulting 
compound is 
oxidized,
reducing NAD+
to NADH.
The remain-
ing molecule is
then attached
to coenzyme A
by an unstable
bond.
4
     CoA is displaced by a 
phosphate group, which is 
transferred to GDP, forming GTP, 
a molecule with functions 
similar to ATP. GTP can also be 
used, as shown, to generate ATP.
5
S-CoA
CoA-SH
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
. Figure 10.11 A closer look at the citric 
acid cycle. In the chemical structures, red 
type traces the fate of the two carbon atoms 
that enter the cycle via acetyl CoA (step 1), 
and blue type indicates the two carbons that 
exit the cycle as CO2 in steps 3 and 4. (The 
red type goes only through step 5 because 
the succinate molecule is symmetrical; the 
two ends cannot be distinguished from 
each other.) Notice that the carbon atoms 
that enter the cycle from acetyl CoA do not 
leave the cycle in the same turn. They remain 
in the cycle, occupying a different location 
in the molecules on their next turn, after 
another acetyl group is added. Therefore, 
the oxaloacetate regenerated at step 8 is 
made up of different carbon atoms each time 
around. Carboxylic acids are represented in 
their ionized forms, as ¬COO–, because the 
ionized forms prevail at the pH within!the 
mitochondrion. In eukaryotic cells, all 
the!citric acid cycle enzymes are located 
in the mitochondrial matrix except for the 
enzyme that catalyzes step 6, which resides 
in the inner mitochondrial membrane. (The 
enzyme that catalyzes step 3, isocitrate 
dehydrogenase, is shown in Figure 7.32b.)
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: The Citric Acid Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   245 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 247 ===

246 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
of the chain becomes reduced when it accepts electrons from 
its “uphill” neighbor, which has a lower affinity for electrons. 
It then returns to its oxidized form as it passes electrons to its 
“downhill” neighbor, which has a higher affinity for electrons.
Now let’s take a closer look at the electrons as they drop in 
energy level, passing through the components of the electron 
transport chain in Figure 10.12. We’ll first look at the passage of 
1. VISUAL SKILLS In the citric acid cycle shown in Figure 
10.11, what molecules capture energy from the redox reac-
tions? How is ATP produced?
2. What processes in your cells produce the CO2 that you 
exhale?
3. VISUAL SKILLS The conversions shown in Figure 10.9 and 
step 4 of Figure 10.11 are each catalyzed by a large multien-
zyme complex. What similarities are there in the reactions 
that occur in these two cases?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
NADH
NAD+
50
40
30
20
10
0
FMN I
II
III
IV
Fe•S
Q
Fe•S
FAD
Cyt b
Complexes I-IV each
consist of multiple
proteins with electron
carriers.
NADH has the lowest affinity for electrons.
Fe•S
Cyt c1
Cyt c
Cyt a
Cyt a3
2 H+ +
2
FADH2
Free energy (G) relative to O2 (kcal/mol)
H2O
12O2
e–
2e–
2e–
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
Electron transport chain 
Electrons (from NADH or FADH2) 
move from an electron carrier with a 
lower affinity for electrons to an electron 
carrier down the chain with a greater affinity 
for electrons, releasing free energy. 
The last electron carrier (Cyt a3) 
passes its electrons to an O in O2, 
which is very electronegative.
O2 has the highest affinity for electrons.
. Figure 10.12 Free-energy change during electron transport. 
The overall energy drop (/uni2206G) for electrons traveling from NADH to 
oxygen is 53 kcal/mol, but this “fall” is broken up into a series of smaller 
steps by the electron transport chain. (An oxygen atom is represented 
here as 1Š2 O2 to show that O2 is reduced, not individual oxygen atoms.) 
To view these proteins in their cellular context, see Figure 7.32b.
CONCEPT CHECK 10.3
CONCEPT 10.4
During oxidative phosphorylation, 
chemiosmosis couples electron 
transport to ATP synthesis
Our main objective in this chapter is to learn how cells harvest 
the energy of glucose and other nutrients in food to make 
ATP. But the metabolic components of respiration we have 
examined so far, glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, produce 
only 4 ATP molecules per glucose molecule, all by substrate-
level phosphorylation: 2 net ATP from glycolysis and 2 ATP 
from the citric acid cycle. At this point, molecules of NADH 
(and FADH2) account for most of the energy extracted from 
each glucose molecule. These electron escorts link glycolysis 
and the citric acid cycle to the machinery of oxidative phos-
phorylation, which uses energy released by the electron trans-
port chain to power ATP synthesis. In this section, you will 
learn first how the electron transport chain works and then 
how electron flow down the chain is coupled to ATP synthesis.
The Pathway of Electron Transport
The electron transport chain is a collection of molecules embed-
ded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion in eukaryotic 
cells. (In prokaryotes, these molecules reside in the plasma 
membrane.) The folding of the inner membrane to form cris-
tae increases its surface area, providing space for thousands of 
copies of each component of the electron transport chain in a 
mitochondrion. Structure fits function: The infolded membrane 
with its concentration of electron carrier molecules is well-suited 
for the series of sequential redox reactions that take place along 
the electron transport chain. Most components of the chain are 
proteins, which exist in multiprotein complexes numbered I 
through IV. Tightly bound to these proteins are prosthetic groups, 
nonprotein components such as cofactors and coenzymes 
essential for the catalytic functions of certain enzymes.
Figure 10.12 shows the sequence of electron carriers in the 
electron transport chain and the drop in free energy as elec-
trons travel down the chain. During this electron transport, 
electron carriers alternate between reduced and oxidized states 
as they accept and then donate electrons. Each component 
 Mastering Biology  
Figure Walkthrough
VISUAL SKILLS Compare the position of the electrons in 
NADH (see Figure 10.3) at the top of the chain with that in H2O,  
at the bottom. Describe why the electrons in H2O have less 
potential energy, using the term electronegativity.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   246 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 248 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 247
complex called ATP synthase, the enzyme that makes ATP 
from ADP and inorganic phosphate (Figure 10.13). ATP syn-
thase works like an ion pump running in reverse. Ion pumps 
usually use ATP as an energy source to transport ions against 
their gradients. Enzymes can catalyze a reaction in either direc-
tion, depending on the "G for the reaction, which is affected 
by the local concentrations of reactants and products (see 
Concepts 6.2 and 6.3). Under the conditions of cellular respira-
tion, rather than hydrolyzing ATP to pump protons against 
their concentration gradient, ATP synthase uses the energy  
of an existing ion gradient to power ATP synthesis. The power 
source for ATP synthase is a difference in the concentration 
of H+ (a pH difference) on opposite sides of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane. This process, in which energy stored 
in the form of a hydrogen ion gradient across a membrane 
is used to drive cellular work such as the synthesis of ATP, is 
electrons through complex I in some detail as an illustration of 
the general principles involved in electron transport. Electrons 
acquired from glucose by NAD+ during glycolysis and the citric 
acid cycle are transferred from NADH to the first molecule of 
the electron transport chain in complex I. This molecule is a 
flavoprotein, so named because it has a prosthetic group called 
flavin mononucleotide (FMN). In the next redox reaction, the 
flavoprotein returns to its oxidized form as it passes electrons 
to an iron-sulfur protein (Fe#S in complex I), one of a family 
of proteins with both iron and sulfur tightly bound. The iron-
sulfur protein then passes the electrons to a compound called 
ubiquinone (Q in Figure!10.12). This electron carrier is a small 
hydrophobic molecule, the only member of the electron trans-
port chain that is not a protein. Ubiquinone is individually 
mobile within the membrane rather than residing in a particu-
lar complex. (Another name for ubiquinone is coenzyme Q, or 
CoQ; you may have seen it sold as a nutritional supplement.)
Most of the remaining electron carriers between ubiquinone 
and oxygen are proteins called cytochromes. Their prosthetic 
group, called a heme group, has an iron atom that accepts and 
donates electrons. (The heme group in a cytochrome is similar 
to the heme group in hemoglobin, the protein of red blood 
cells, except that the iron in hemoglobin carries oxygen, not 
electrons.) The electron transport chain has several types of 
cytochromes, each named “cyt” with a letter and number to 
distinguish it as a different protein with a slightly different 
electron-carrying heme group. The last cytochrome of the 
chain, cyt a3, passes its electrons to oxygen (in O2), which is 
very electronegative. Each O also picks up a pair of hydrogen 
ions (protons) from the aqueous solution, neutralizing the  
-2 charge of the added electrons and forming water.
Another source of electrons for the electron transport 
chain is FADH2, the other reduced product of the citric acid 
cycle. Notice in Figure 10.12 that FADH2 adds its electrons 
from within complex II, at a lower energy level than NADH 
does. Consequently, although NADH and FADH2 each donate 
an equivalent number of electrons (2) for oxygen reduction, 
the electron transport chain provides about one-third less 
energy for ATP synthesis when the electron donor is FADH2 
rather than NADH. We’ll see why in the next section.
The electron transport chain makes no ATP directly. 
Instead, it eases the fall of electrons from food to oxygen, 
breaking a large free-energy drop into a series of smaller steps 
that release energy in manageable amounts, step by step. How 
does the mitochondrion (or the plasma membrane in prokary-
otes) couple this electron transport and energy release to ATP 
synthesis? The answer is a mechanism called chemiosmosis.
Chemiosmosis:  
The Energy-Coupling Mechanism
Populating the inner membrane of the mitochondrion or the 
prokaryotic plasma membrane are many copies of a protein 
Rotor
Stator
ADP
+
MITOCHONDRIAL MATRIX
INTERMEMBRANE SPACE
Internal
rod
Catalytic
knob
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Intermembrane space
Mitochondrial matrix
H+ ions
ATPPi
     H+ ions enter binding
sites within a rotor,
changing the shape of
each subunit so that
the rotor spins within
the membrane.
2
     H+ ions flowing
down their gradient
enter a channel in
a stator, which is
anchored in the
membrane.
1
     Each H+ ion makes one
complete turn before
leaving the rotor and
passing through a second
channel in the stator
into the mitochondrial
matrix.
3
     Spinning of the
rotor causes an internal
rod to spin as well. This
rod extends like a stalk
into the knob below it,
which is held stationary
by part of the stator.
4
     Turning of the rod
activates catalytic sites
in the knob that
produce ATP from ADP
and      .
5
Pi
. Figure 10.13 ATP synthase, a molecular mill. Multiple 
ATP!synthases reside in eukaryotic mitochondrial and 
chloroplast!membranes and in prokaryotic plasma membranes. 
(See!Figure!7.32b and c.)
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: ATP Synthase 
Animation: Rotating ATP Synthase
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   247 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 249 ===

248 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
How does the inner mitochondrial membrane (or the pro-
karyotic plasma membrane) generate and maintain the H+ 
gradient that drives ATP synthesis by the ATP synthase protein 
complex? Establishing the H+ gradient is a major function of the 
electron transport chain, which is shown in its mitochondrial 
location in Figure 10.14. The chain is an energy converter that 
uses the exergonic flow of electrons from NADH and FADH2 to 
pump H+ across the membrane, from the mitochondrial matrix 
into the intermembrane space. The H+ has a tendency to move 
back across the membrane, diffusing down its gradient. And the 
ATP synthases are the only sites that provide a route through 
the!membrane for H+. As we described previously, the passage  
called chemiosmosis (from the Greek osmos, push). The word 
 osmosis was previously used in discussing water transport, but 
here it refers to the flow of H+ across a membrane.
From studying the structure of ATP synthase, scientists 
have learned how the flow of H+ through this enzyme powers 
ATP generation. ATP synthase is a multisubunit complex with 
four main parts, each made up of multiple polypeptides (see 
Figure!10.13). Protons move one by one into binding sites on 
the rotor, causing it to spin in a way that catalyzes ATP produc-
tion from ADP and ~P i. The flow of protons thus behaves some-
what like a rushing stream that turns a waterwheel. ATP syn-
thase is the smallest molecular rotary motor known in nature.
Intermembrane
space
Inner 
mitochondrial
membrane
Mitochondrial
matrix
Electron transport chain
Electron transport and pumping of protons (H+),
which create an H+ gradient across the membrane
Oxidative phosphorylation
Chemiosmosis
ATP synthesis powered by the flow
of H+ back across the membrane
ATPADP +
H2O2 H+ +      O2
NAD+
FAD
(carrying electrons
from food)
Cyt c
Q
Protein complex
of electron
carriers
I III
IV
ATP
synthase
Pi
12
II
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+ H+
H+
H+H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
NADH
FADH2
1 2
H+
H+
PYRUVATE
OXIDATION 
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
GLYCOLYSIS
ATP
OXIDATIVE 
PHOSPHORY-
LATION
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Intermembrane space
Mitochondrial matrix
. Figure 10.14 Chemiosmosis couples 
the electron transport chain to ATP 
synthesis. 1 NADH and FADH2 shuttle 
high-energy electrons extracted from food 
during glycolysis and the citric acid cycle into 
an electron transport chain built into the 
inner mitochondrial membrane. (See Figure 
7.32b.) The gold arrows trace the transport 
of electrons, which are finally passed to a 
terminal acceptor (O2, in the case of aerobic 
respiration) at the “downhill” end of the 
chain, forming water. Most of the electron 
carriers of the chain are grouped into four 
complexes (I–IV). Two mobile carriers, 
ubiquinone (Q) and cytochrome c (Cyt c), 
move rapidly, ferrying electrons between the 
large complexes. As the complexes shuttle 
electrons, they pump protons from the 
mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane 
space. FADH2 deposits its electrons via 
complex II and so results in fewer protons 
being pumped into the intermembrane space 
than occurs with NADH. Chemical energy 
originally harvested from food is transformed 
into a proton-motive force, a gradient 
of H+ across the membrane. 2 During 
chemiosmosis, the protons flow back down 
their gradient via ATP synthase, which is built 
into the membrane nearby. The ATP synthase 
harnesses the proton-motive force to 
phosphorylate ADP, forming ATP. Together, 
electron transport and chemiosmosis make 
up oxidative phosphorylation.
WHAT IF? If complex IV were nonfunctional, could chemiosmosis 
produce any ATP, and if so, how would the rate of synthesis differ?
 Mastering Biology Animation: Electron Transport 
BioFlix® Animation: Electron Transport
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   248 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 250 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 249
chemical energy) drives both electron flow down an electron 
transport chain and the resulting H+ gradient formation. 
Prokaryotes, as already mentioned, generate H+ gradients across 
their plasma membranes. They then tap the proton-motive force 
not only to make ATP inside the cell but also to rotate their fla-
gella and to pump nutrients and waste products across the mem-
brane. Because of its central importance to energy conversions 
in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, chemiosmosis has helped unify 
the study of bioenergetics. Peter Mitchell was awarded the Nobel 
Prize in 1978 for originally proposing the chemiosmotic model.
An Accounting of ATP Production  
by Cellular Respiration
In the last few sections, we have looked rather closely at the 
key processes of cellular respiration. Now let’s take a step back 
and remind ourselves of its overall function: harvesting the 
energy of glucose for ATP synthesis.
During respiration, most energy flows in this sequence: glu-
cose S NADH S electron transport chain S proton-motive 
force S ATP. We can do some bookkeeping to calculate the 
ATP profit when cellular respiration oxidizes a molecule of 
glucose to six molecules of carbon dioxide. The three main 
departments of this metabolic enterprise are glycolysis, 
pyruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle, and the electron 
transport chain, which drives oxidative phosphorylation. 
Figure 10.15 gives a detailed accounting of the ATP yield for 
of H+ through ATP synthase uses the exergonic flow of H+ to 
drive the phosphorylation of ADP. Thus, the energy stored in an 
H+ gradient across a membrane couples the redox reactions of 
the electron transport chain to ATP synthesis.
At this point, you may be wondering how the electron 
transport chain pumps hydrogen ions into the intermembrane 
space. Researchers have found that certain members of the 
electron transport chain accept and release protons (H+) along 
with electrons. (The aqueous solutions inside and surround-
ing the cell are a ready source of H+.) At certain steps along the 
chain, electron transfers cause H+ to be taken up and released 
into the surrounding solution. In eukaryotic cells, the elec-
tron carriers are spatially arranged in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane in such a way that H+ is accepted from the mito-
chondrial matrix and deposited in the intermembrane space 
(see Figure 10.14). The H+ gradient that results is referred to as a 
proton-motive force, emphasizing the capacity of the gradi-
ent to perform work. The force drives H+ back across the mem-
brane through the H+ channels provided by ATP synthases.
In general terms, chemiosmosis is an energy-coupling mecha-
nism that uses energy stored in the form of an H+ gradient across a 
membrane to drive cellular work. In mitochondria, the energy for 
gradient formation comes from exergonic redox reactions along 
the electron transport chain, and ATP synthesis is the work per-
formed. But chemiosmosis also occurs elsewhere and in other 
variations. Chloroplasts use chemiosmosis to generate ATP 
during photosynthesis; in these organelles, light (rather!than 
About
30 or 32 ATP
by substrate-level
phosphorylation
+ 2 ATP
by substrate-level
phosphorylation
+ about 26 or 28 ATP
by oxidative phosphorylation, depending
on which shuttle transports electrons
from NADH in cytosol 
CYTOSOL MITOCHONDRIONElectron shuttles
span membrane
Maximum per glucose:
+ 2 ATP
2 FADH2
2 NADH
or
GLYCOLYSIS
Glucose 2 Pyruvate
PYRUVATE OXIDATION
2 Acetyl CoA
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
OXIDATIVE
PHOSPHORYLATION
(Electron transport 
and chemiosmosis)
2 NADH 6 NADH   2 FADH22 NADH
. Figure 10.15 ATP yield per molecule of glucose at each stage of cellular respiration.
VISUAL SKILLS After reading the discussion in the text, explain exactly 
how the total of 26 or 28 ATP from oxidative phosphorylation was 
calculated (see the yellow bar).
 Mastering Biology Animation: ATP Yield from 
Cellular Respiration
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   249 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 251 ===

250 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
We can now roughly estimate the efficiency of respiration—
that is, the percentage of chemical energy in glucose that has 
been transferred to ATP. Recall that the complete oxidation of 
a mole of glucose releases 686 kcal of energy under standard 
conditions (/uni2206G =-686 kcal/mol). Phosphorylation of ADP 
to form ATP stores at least 7.3 kcal per mole of ATP. Therefore, 
the efficiency of respiration is 7.3 kcal per mole of ATP times 
32!moles of ATP per mole of glucose divided by 686 kcal per 
mole of glucose, which equals 0.34. Thus, about 34% of the 
potential chemical energy in glucose has been transferred to 
ATP; the actual percentage is bound to vary as /uni2206G varies under 
different cellular conditions. Cellular respiration is remark-
ably efficient in its energy conversion. By comparison, even 
the most efficient automobile converts only about 25% of the 
energy stored in gasoline to energy that moves the car.
The rest of the energy stored in glucose is lost as heat. We 
humans use some of this heat to maintain our relatively high 
body temperature (37°C), and we dissipate the rest through 
sweating and other cooling mechanisms.
Surprisingly, perhaps, it may be beneficial under certain 
conditions to reduce the efficiency of cellular respiration. 
A remarkable adaptation is shown by hibernating mam-
mals, which overwinter in a state of inactivity and lowered 
metabolism. Although their internal body temperature is 
lower than normal, it still must be kept significantly higher 
than the external air temperature. One type of tissue, called 
brown fat, is made up of cells packed full of mitochondria. 
The inner mitochondrial membrane contains a channel 
protein called the uncoupling protein that allows protons 
to flow back down their concentration gradient without 
generating ATP. Activation of these proteins in hibernating 
mammals results in ongoing oxidation of stored fuel (fats), 
generating heat without any ATP production. In the absence 
of such an adaptation, the buildup of ATP would eventu-
ally cause cellular respiration to be shut down by regulatory 
mechanisms that will be discussed later. Brown fat is also 
used for heat generation in humans. In the Scientific Skills 
Exercise, you can work with data in a related but different 
case where a decrease in metabolic efficiency in cells is used 
to generate heat.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Cellular Respiration
each!glucose molecule that is oxidized. The tally adds the 4 
ATP produced directly by substrate-level phosphorylation dur-
ing glycolysis and the citric acid cycle to the many more mol-
ecules of ATP generated by oxidative phosphorylation. Each 
NADH that transfers a pair of electrons from glucose to the 
electron transport chain contributes enough to the proton-
motive force to generate a maximum of about 3 ATP.
Why are the numbers in Figure 10.15 inexact? There are three 
reasons we cannot state an exact number of ATP molecules gen-
erated by the breakdown of one molecule of glucose. First, phos-
phorylation and the redox reactions are not directly coupled to 
each other, so the ratio of the number of NADH molecules to the 
number of ATP molecules is not a whole number. We know that 
1 NADH results in 10 H+ being transported out across the inner 
mitochondrial membrane, but the exact number of H+ that must 
reenter the mitochondrial matrix via ATP synthase to generate 
1 ATP has long been debated. Based on experimental data, how-
ever, most biochemists now agree that the most accurate number 
is 4 H+. Therefore, a single molecule of NADH generates enough 
proton-motive force for the synthesis of 2.5 ATP. The citric acid 
cycle also supplies electrons to the electron transport chain via 
FADH2, but since its electrons enter later in the chain, each mol-
ecule of this electron carrier is responsible for transport of only 
enough H+ for the synthesis of 1.5 ATP. These numbers also take 
into account the slight energetic cost of moving the ATP formed 
in the mitochondrion out into the cytosol, where it will be used.
Second, the ATP yield varies slightly depending on the type 
of shuttle used to transport electrons from the cytosol into 
the mitochondrion. The mitochondrial inner membrane is 
not permeable to NADH, so NADH in the cytosol is segregated 
from the machinery of oxidative phosphorylation. The 2 elec-
trons of NADH captured in glycolysis must be conveyed into 
the mitochondrion by one of several electron shuttle systems. 
Depending on the kind of shuttle in a particular cell type, the 
electrons are passed either to NAD+ or to FAD in the mitochon-
drial matrix (see Figures 10.14 and 10.15). If the electrons are 
passed to FAD, as in brain cells, only about 1.5 ATP can result 
from each NADH that was originally generated in the cytosol. 
If the electrons are passed to mitochondrial NAD+, as in liver 
cells and heart cells, the yield is about 2.5 ATP per NADH.
A third variable that reduces the yield of ATP is the use of 
the proton-motive force generated by the redox reactions 
of respiration to drive other kinds of work. For example, the 
proton-motive force powers the mitochondrion’s uptake of 
pyruvate from the cytosol (see Figure 10.9). However, if all 
the proton-motive force generated by the electron transport 
chain were used to drive ATP synthesis, one glucose molecule 
could generate a maximum of 28 ATP produced by oxida-
tive phosphorylation plus 4 ATP (net) from substrate-level 
phosphorylation to give a total yield of about 32 ATP (or only 
about 30 ATP if the less efficient shuttle were functioning).
 Mastering Biology Animation: Electron Transport Chain: 
Factors Affecting ATP!Yield
1. WHAT IF? What effect would an absence of O2 have on the 
process shown in Figure 10.14?
2. WHAT IF? In the absence of O2, as in question 1, what 
do you think would happen if you decreased the pH of 
the intermembrane space of the mitochondrion? Explain 
your!answer.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Membranes must be fluid to 
 f u n c t i o n  p r o p e r l y  (see Concept 8.1). How does the operation 
of the electron transport chain support that assertion?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 10.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   250 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 252 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 251
two is that an electron transport chain is used in anaerobic 
respiration but not in fermentation. (The electron transport 
chain is also called the respiratory chain because of its role in 
both types of cellular respiration.)
We have already mentioned anaerobic respiration, which 
takes place in certain prokaryotic organisms that live in 
environments without O2. These organisms have an electron 
transport chain but do not use O2 as a final electron acceptor 
at the end of the chain. O2 performs this function very well 
because it consists of two extremely electronegative atoms, 
but other substances can also serve as final electron acceptors. 
Some “sulfate-reducing” marine bacteria, for instance, use 
the sulfate ion (SO4
2-) at the end of their respiratory chain. 
Operation of the chain builds up a proton-motive force used 
to produce ATP, but H2S (hydrogen sulfide) is made as a 
Fermentation and anaerobic 
respiration enable cells to produce 
ATP without the use of oxygen
Because most of the ATP generated by cellular respiration is 
due to the work of oxidative phosphorylation, our estimate 
of ATP yield from aerobic respiration depends on an adequate 
supply of O2 to the cell. Without the electronegative oxygen 
atoms in O2 to pull electrons down the transport chain, oxi-
dative phosphorylation eventually ceases. However, there are 
two general mechanisms by which certain cells can oxidize 
organic fuel and generate ATP without the use of O2: anaerobic 
respiration and fermentation. The distinction between these 
Making a Bar Graph and  
Evaluating a Hypothesis
Does Thyroid Hormone Level Affect O2 Consumption 
in!Cells? Some animals, such as mammals and birds, maintain 
a!relatively constant body temperature, above that of their 
 e n v i r o n m e n t ,  b y  u s i n g  h e a t  p r o d u c e d  a s  a  b y - p r o d u c t  o f  m e-
tabolism. When the core temperature of these animals drops 
below an internal set point, their cells are triggered to reduce 
the  efficiency of ATP production by the electron transport 
chains in mitochondria. At lower efficiency, extra fuel must be 
consumed to produce the same number of ATPs, generating 
additional heat. This response is moderated by the endocrine 
system, and researchers hypothesized that it might be trig-
gered by thyroid hormone. In this exercise, you will use a bar 
graph to visualize data from an experiment that compared 
the metabolic rates (by measuring O2 consumption) in mito-
chondria of cells from animals with different levels of thyroid 
hormone.
How the Experiment Was Done Liver cells were isolated from 
sibling rats that had low, normal, or elevated thyroid hormone 
levels. The oxygen consumption rate due to activity of the mito-
chondrial electron transport chains of each type of cell was mea-
sured under controlled conditions.
Data from the Experiment
Thyroid Hormone Level
Oxygen Consumption Rate 
[nmol!O2/(min#mg cells)]
Low 4.3
Normal 4.8
Elevated 8.7
Data from M. E. Harper and M. D. Brand, The quantitative contributions of mito-
chondrial proton leak and ATP turnover reactions to the changed respiration rates 
of hepatocytes from rats of different thyroid status, Journal of Biological Chemistry 
268:14850–14860 (1993).
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. To visualize any differ-
ences in O2 consump-
tion between cell types, 
it will be useful to 
graph the data in a bar 
graph. First, set up the 
axes. (a)!What is the 
independent variable 
(intentionally varied by 
the researchers), which goes on the x-axis? List the catego-
ries along the x-axis; because they are discrete rather than 
continuous, you can list them in any order. (b) What is the 
dependent variable (measured by the researchers), which 
goes on the y-axis? (c) What units (abbreviated) should go 
on the y-axis? Label the y-axis, including the units specified 
in the data table. Determine the range of values of the data 
that will need to go on the y-axis. What is the largest value? 
Draw evenly spaced tick marks and label them, starting with 
0!at the bottom.
2. Graph the data for each sample. Match each x-value with its 
y-value and place a mark on the graph at that coordinate, then 
draw a bar from the x-axis up to the correct height for each 
sample. Why is a bar graph more appropriate than a scatter plot 
or line graph? (For additional information about graphs, see the 
Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
3. Examine your graph and look for a pattern in the data. 
(a)!Which cell type had the highest rate of O2 consump-
tion, and which had the lowest? (b) Does this support the 
 researchers’ hypothesis? Explain. (c) Based on what you know 
about mitochondrial electron transport and heat production, 
predict which rats had the highest, and which had the lowest, 
body temperature.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
CONCEPT 10.5
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   251 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 253 ===

252 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
During lactic acid  fermentation (Figure 10.16b), pyru-
vate is reduced directly by NADH to form lactate as an end prod-
uct, regenerating NAD+ with no 
release of CO2. (Lactate is the ion-
ized form of lactic acid.) Lactic acid 
fermentation by certain fungi and 
bacteria is used in the dairy indus-
try to make cheese and yogurt. A 
complex series of fermentation 
and aerobic respiration pathways 
carried out by yeasts and bacteria 
on cacao beans is responsible for 
the production of chocolate.
by-product rather than water. The rotten-egg odor you may 
have smelled while walking through a salt marsh or a mudflat 
signals the presence of sulfate-reducing bacteria.
Fermentation is a way of harvesting chemical energy with-
out using either O2 or any electron transport chain—in other 
words, without cellular respiration. How can food be oxidized 
without cellular respiration? Remember, oxidation simply 
refers to the loss of electrons to an electron acceptor, so it does 
not need to involve O2. Glycolysis oxidizes glucose to two mol-
ecules of pyruvate. The oxidizing agent of glycolysis is NAD+,  
and neither O2 nor any electron transfer chain is involved. 
Overall, glycolysis is exergonic, and some of the energy made 
available is used to produce 2 ATP (net) by substrate-level 
phosphorylation. If O2 is present, then additional ATP is made 
by oxidative phosphorylation when NADH passes electrons 
removed from glucose to the electron transport chain. But gly-
colysis generates 2 ATP whether oxygen is present or not—that 
is, whether conditions are aerobic or anaerobic.
As an alternative to respiratory oxidation of organic nutri-
ents, fermentation is an extension of glycolysis that allows con-
tinuous generation of ATP by the substrate-level phosphoryla-
tion of glycolysis. For this to occur, there must be a sufficient 
supply of NAD+ to accept electrons during the oxidation step 
of glycolysis. Without some mechanism to recycle NAD+ from 
NADH, glycolysis would soon deplete the cell’s pool of NAD+ 
by reducing it all to NADH and would shut itself down for 
lack of an oxidizing agent. Under aerobic conditions, NAD+ is 
recycled from NADH by the transfer of electrons to the electron 
transport chain. An anaerobic alternative is to transfer electrons 
from NADH to pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis.
Types of Fermentation
Fermentation consists of glycolysis plus reactions that regenerate 
NAD+ by transferring electrons from NADH to pyruvate or deriv-
atives of pyruvate. The NAD+ can then be reused to oxidize sugar 
by glycolysis, which nets two molecules of ATP by substrate-level 
phosphorylation. There are many types of fermentation, differ-
ing in the end products formed from pyruvate. Two types are 
alcohol fermentation and lactic acid fermentation, and both are 
harnessed by humans for food and industrial production.
In alcohol fermentation (Figure 10.16a), pyruvate is 
converted to ethanol (ethyl alcohol) in two steps. The first 
step releases CO2 from the pyruvate, which is converted to 
the two-carbon compound acetaldehyde. In the second step, 
acetaldehyde is reduced by NADH to ethanol. This regener-
ates the supply of NAD+ needed for the continuation of gly-
colysis. Many bacteria carry out alcohol fermentation under 
anaerobic conditions. Yeast (a fungus), in addition to aerobic 
respiration, also carries out alcohol fermentation. For thou-
sands of years, humans have used yeast in brewing, winemak-
ing, and baking. The CO2 bubbles generated by baker’s yeast 
during alcohol fermentation allow bread to rise.
2 ATP
2 ATP
GLYCOLYSIS
GLYCOLYSIS
Glucose
2   NAD+
NAD+ REGENERATION
NAD+ REGENERATION
2 ADP +2
2 Pyruvate
2 Acetaldehyde
+ 2 H+
2   NADH
2   NAD+ 2   NADH
O
O–
H
OC
CH3
C
OC
CH3
2 
Glucose
2 Lactate
2 ADP +
2 Pyruvate
+ 2 H+
O
O–
C
OC
CH3
2
(a) Alcohol fermentation
(b) Lactic acid fermentation
O–
OHCH
CH3
OC
2 Ethanol
H
OHCH
CH3
Pi
Pi
CO2
. Figure 10.16 Fermentation. In the absence of oxygen, many cells 
use fermentation to produce ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation. 
NAD+ is regenerated for use in glycolysis when pyruvate, the end 
product of glycolysis, serves as an electron acceptor for oxidizing 
NADH. Two of the common end products formed from fermentation 
are (a) ethanol and (b) lactate, the ionized form of lactic acid.
. Cacao beans and fruits
 Mastering Biology Animation: Fermentation
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   252 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 254 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 253
process is shuttled by NADH and FADH2 in the form of electrons 
to the electron transport chain. There, the electrons move step-
wise down a series of redox reactions to a final electron acceptor. 
(In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor is O2; in anaer-
obic respiration, the final acceptor is another molecule with a 
high affinity for electrons, although less so than O2.) Stepwise 
electron transport drives oxidative phosphorylation, yielding 
ATP. Thus, cellular respiration harvests much more energy from 
each sugar molecule than fermentation can. In fact, aerobic res-
piration yields up to 32 molecules of ATP per glucose molecule—
up to 16 times as much as does fermentation.
Some organisms, called obligate anaerobes, carry out 
only fermentation or anaerobic respiration. In fact, these 
organisms cannot survive in the presence of oxygen, some 
forms of which can actually be toxic if protective systems 
are not present in the cell. A few cell types, such as cells of 
the vertebrate brain, can carry out only aerobic oxidation of 
pyruvate, and need O2 to survive. Other organisms, including 
yeasts and many bacteria, can make enough ATP to survive 
using either fermentation or respiration. Such species are 
called facultative anaerobes. In yeast cells, for example, 
pyruvate is a fork in the metabolic road that leads to two alter-
native catabolic routes (Figure 10.17). Under aerobic condi-
tions, pyruvate can be converted to acetyl CoA, and oxida-
tion continues in the citric acid cycle via aerobic respiration. 
Under anaerobic conditions, lactic acid fermentation occurs. 
Pyruvate is diverted from the citric acid cycle, serving instead 
What about lactate production in humans? Previously, 
we thought that human muscle cells only produced lactate 
when O2 was in short supply, such as during intense exercise. 
Research done over the last few decades, though, indicates 
that the lactate story, in mammals at least, is more compli-
cated. There are two types of skeletal muscle fibers. One (red 
muscle) preferentially oxidizes glucose completely to CO2; the 
other (white muscle) produces significant amounts of lactate 
from the pyruvate made during glycolysis, even under aero-
bic conditions, offering fast but energetically inefficient ATP 
production. The lactate product is then mostly oxidized by 
red muscle cells in the vicinity, with the remainder exported 
to liver or kidney cells for glucose formation. Because this lac-
tate production is not anaerobic, but the result of glycolysis 
in these cells, exercise physiologists prefer not to use the term 
fermentation.
During strenuous exercise, when carbohydrate catabolism 
outpaces the supply of O2 from the blood to the muscle, lac-
tate can’t be oxidized to pyruvate. The lactate that accumu-
lates was once thought to cause muscle fatigue during intense 
exercise and pain a day or so later. However, research suggests 
that, contrary to popular opinion, lactate production actually 
improves performance during exercise! Furthermore, within 
an hour, excess lactate is shuttled to other tissues for oxida-
tion or to the liver and kidneys for production of glucose or 
its storage molecule, glycogen. (Nextday muscle soreness is 
more likely caused by trauma to cells in small muscle fibers, 
which leads to inflammation and pain.)
Comparing Fermentation with  
Anaerobic and Aerobic Respiration
Fermentation, anaerobic respiration, and aerobic respiration 
are three alternative cellular pathways for producing ATP by 
harvesting the chemical energy of food. All three use glycoly-
sis to oxidize glucose and other organic fuels to pyruvate, 
with a net production of 2 ATP by substrate-level phosphory-
lation. And in all three pathways, NAD+ is the oxidizing agent 
that accepts electrons from food during glycolysis.
A key difference is the contrasting mechanisms for oxi-
dizing NADH back to NAD+, which is required to sustain 
glycolysis. In fermentation, the final electron acceptor is an 
organic molecule such as pyruvate (lactic acid fermentation) 
or acetaldehyde (alcohol fermentation). In cellular respira-
tion, by contrast, electrons carried by NADH are transferred 
to an electron transport chain, which regenerates the NAD+ 
required for glycolysis.
Another major difference is the amount of ATP produced. 
Fermentation yields two molecules of ATP, produced by 
 substrate-level phosphorylation. In the absence of an electron 
transport chain, the energy stored in pyruvate is unavailable. 
In!cellular respiration, however, pyruvate is completely oxidized 
in the mitochondrion. Most of the chemical!energy!from this 
CITRIC
ACID
CYCLE
Glucose
Glycolysis
Pyruvate
Acetyl CoA
MITOCHONDRION
No O2 present:
Fermentation
O2 present:
  Aerobic cellular 
    respiration
CYTOSOL
Ethanol,
lactate, or
other products
. Figure 10.17 Pyruvate as a key juncture in catabolism. 
Glycolysis is common to fermentation and cellular respiration. 
The end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, represents a fork in the 
catabolic pathways of glucose oxidation. In a facultative anaerobe, 
capable of both aerobic cellular respiration and fermentation, 
pyruvate is committed to one of those two pathways, usually 
depending on whether or not oxygen is present.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   253 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 255 ===

254 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
animals. We obtain most of our calories in the form of fats, 
proteins, and carbohydrates such as sucrose and other disac-
charides, and starch, a polysaccharide. All these organic 
molecules in food can be used by cellular respiration to 
make ATP (Figure 10.18).
Glycolysis can accept a wide range of carbohydrates for 
catabolism. In the digestive tract, starch is hydrolyzed to glu-
cose, which is broken down in cells by glycolysis and the cit-
ric acid cycle. Glycogen, the polysaccharide that humans and 
many other animals store in their liver and muscle cells, can 
be hydrolyzed to glucose between meals as fuel for respira-
tion. Digestion of disaccharides, including sucrose, provides 
glucose and other monosaccharides as fuel for respiration.
Proteins can also be used for fuel, but first they must be 
digested to their constituent amino acids. Many of the amino 
acids are used by the organism to build new proteins. Amino 
acids present in excess are converted by enzymes to inter-
mediates of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Before amino 
acids can feed into glycolysis or the citric acid cycle, their 
amino groups must be removed, a process called deamination. 
The nitrogenous waste is excreted from the animal in the 
form of ammonia (NH3), urea, or other waste products.
as an electron acceptor to recycle NAD+. To make the same 
amount of ATP, a facultative anaerobe has to consume sugar 
at a much faster rate when fermenting than when respiring.
The Evolutionary Significance of Glycolysis
EVOLUTION The role of glycolysis in both fermentation 
and respiration has an evolutionary basis. Ancient prokary-
otes are thought to have used glycolysis to make ATP long 
before oxygen was present in Earth’s atmosphere. The old-
est known fossils of bacteria date back 3.5 billion years, but 
appreciable quantities of oxygen probably did not begin 
to accumulate in the atmosphere until about 2.7 billion 
years ago. Cyanobacteria produced this O2 as a by-product 
of photosynthesis. Therefore, early prokaryotes may have 
generated ATP exclusively from glycolysis. The fact that 
glycolysis is today the most widespread metabolic pathway 
among Earth’s organisms suggests that it evolved very early 
in the history of life. The cytosolic location of glycolysis 
also implies great antiquity; the pathway does not require 
any of the membrane-enclosed organelles of the eukaryotic 
cell, which evolved approximately 1 billion years after the 
first prokaryotic cell. Glycolysis is a metabolic heirloom 
from early cells that continues to function in fermentation 
and as the first stage in the breakdown of organic molecules 
by respiration.
CITRIC
ACID
CYCLE
Amino 
acids
Sugars Glycerol Fatty
acids
Glucose
Glyceraldehyde 3-
Pyruvate
Acetyl CoA
NH3
GLYCOLYSIS
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Proteins Carbohydrates Fats
P
. Figure 10.18 The catabolism of various molecules from 
food. Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins can all be used as fuel for 
cellular respiration. Monomers of these molecules enter glycolysis 
or the citric acid cycle at various points. Glycolysis and the citric acid 
cycle are catabolic funnels through which electrons from all kinds of 
organic molecules flow on their exergonic fall to oxygen.
CONCEPT CHECK 10.5
1. What are the end products of alcohol fermentation and 
lactic acid fermentation? How many molecules of ATP are 
generated in each of these processes?
2. WHAT IF? Yeast cells can survive without functional mito-
chondria, but they will grow slowly and form petite colonies. 
What will happen if these petite cells lose the enzyme that 
converts acetaldehyde to ethanol?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 10.6
Glycolysis and the citric acid 
cycle connect to many other 
metabolic pathways
So far, we have looked at the oxidative breakdown of glucose 
in isolation from the cell’s overall metabolic economy. In this 
section, you will learn that glycolysis and the citric acid cycle 
are major intersections of the cell’s catabolic (breakdown) 
and anabolic (biosynthetic) pathways.
The Versatility of Catabolism
Throughout this chapter, glucose has been used as an 
example of a fuel for cellular respiration. But free glucose 
molecules are not common in the diets of humans and other 
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   254 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 256 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 255
amino acid, for example, the anabolic pathway that synthesizes 
that amino acid from an intermediate of the citric acid cycle is 
switched off. The most common mechanism for this control is 
feedback inhibition: The end product of the anabolic pathway 
inhibits the enzyme that catalyzes an early step of the pathway 
(see Figure 6.21). This prevents the needless diversion of key 
metabolic intermediates from uses that are more urgent.
The cell also controls its catabolism. If the cell is work-
ing hard and its ATP concentration begins to drop, cellular 
respiration speeds up. When there is plenty of ATP to meet 
demand, respiration slows down, sparing valuable organic 
molecules for other functions. Again, control is based mainly 
on regulating the activity of enzymes at strategic points in the 
catabolic pathway. As shown in Figure 10.19, one important 
switch is phosphofructokinase, the enzyme that catalyzes 
step 3 of glycolysis (see Figure 10.8). That is the first step that 
Catabolism can also harvest energy stored in fats obtained 
either from food or from fat cells in the body. After fats are 
digested to glycerol and fatty acids, the glycerol is converted 
to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, an intermediate of glycoly-
sis. Most of the energy of a fat is stored in the fatty acids. A 
metabolic sequence called beta oxidation breaks the fatty 
acids down to two-carbon fragments, which enter the citric 
acid cycle as acetyl CoA. NADH and FADH2 are also generated 
during beta oxidation; they can enter the electron transport 
chain, leading to further ATP production. Fats make excel-
lent fuels, in large part due to their chemical structure and 
the high energy level of their electrons (present in many 
C¬H bonds, equally shared between C and H) compared to 
those of carbohydrates. A gram of fat oxidized by respiration 
produces more than twice as much ATP as a gram of carbohy-
drate. Unfortunately, this also means that a person trying to 
lose weight must work hard to use up fat stored in the body 
because so many calories are stockpiled in each gram of fat.
Biosynthesis (Anabolic Pathways)
Cells need substance as well as energy. Not all the organic mol-
ecules of food are destined to be oxidized as fuel to make ATP. In 
addition to calories, food must also provide the carbon skeletons 
that cells require to make their own molecules. Some organic 
monomers obtained from digestion can be used directly. For 
example, as previously mentioned, amino acids from the hydro-
lysis of proteins in food can be incorporated into the organism’s 
own proteins. Often, however, the body needs specific molecules 
that are not present as such in food. Compounds formed as inter-
mediates of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle can be diverted 
into anabolic pathways as precursors from which the cell can 
synthesize the molecules it requires. For example, humans can 
make about half of the 20 amino acids in proteins by modifying 
compounds siphoned away from the citric acid cycle; the rest are 
“essential amino acids” that must be obtained in the diet. Also, 
glucose can be made from pyruvate, and fatty acids can be syn-
thesized from acetyl CoA. Of course, these anabolic, or biosyn-
thetic, pathways do not generate ATP, but instead consume it.
In addition, glycolysis and the citric acid cycle function as 
metabolic interchanges that enable our cells to convert some 
kinds of molecules to others as we need them. For example, 
an intermediate compound generated during glycolysis, 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (see Figure 10.8, step 5), can 
be converted to one of the major precursors of fats. If we eat 
more food than we need, we store fat even if our diet is fat-
free. Metabolism is remarkably versatile and adaptable.
Regulation of Cellular Respiration  
via Feedback Mechanisms
Basic principles of supply and demand regulate the metabolic 
economy. The cell does not waste energy making more of a par-
ticular substance than it needs. If there is a surplus of a certain 
– –
+
ATP
Pyruvate
Glucose
Stimulates
InhibitsInhibits
Citrate
Fructose 6-phosphate
GLYCOLYSIS
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
AMP
Phosphofructokinase
Acetyl CoA
CITRIC
ACID
CYCLE
Oxidative
phosphorylation
. Figure 10.19 The control of cellular respiration. Allosteric 
enzymes at certain points in the respiratory pathway respond to 
inhibitors and activators that help set the pace of glycolysis and the 
citric acid cycle. Phosphofructokinase, which catalyzes an early step 
in glycolysis (see Figure 10.8, step 3 and Figure 7.32b), is one such 
enzyme. It is stimulated by AMP (derived from ADP) but is inhibited 
by ATP and by citrate. This feedback regulation adjusts the rate of 
respiration as the cell’s catabolic and anabolic demands change.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   255 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 257 ===

 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
10 Chapter Review
key steps of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Cells are thrifty, 
expedient, and responsive in their metabolism.
Review the first page of this chapter to put cellular respi-
ration into the broader context of energy flow and chemi-
cal cycling in ecosystems. The energy that keeps us alive is 
released, not produced, by cellular respiration. We are tapping 
energy that was stored in food by photosynthesis, which cap-
tures light and converts it to chemical energy, a process you 
will learn about in Chapter 11.
commits the substrate irreversibly to the glycolytic pathway. 
By controlling the rate of this step, the cell can speed up or 
slow down the entire catabolic process. Phosphofructokinase 
can thus be considered the pacemaker of cellular respiration.
Phosphofructokinase is an allosteric enzyme with receptor 
sites for specific inhibitors and activators. It is inhibited by ATP 
and stimulated by AMP (adenosine monophosphate), which 
the cell derives from ADP. As ATP accumulates, inhibition 
of the enzyme slows down glycolysis. The enzyme becomes 
active again as cellular work converts ATP to ADP (and AMP) 
faster than ATP is being regenerated. Phosphofructokinase is 
also sensitive to citrate, the first product of the citric acid cycle. 
If citrate accumulates in mitochondria, some of it passes into 
the cytosol and inhibits phosphofructokinase. This mecha-
nism helps synchronize the rates of glycolysis and the citric 
acid cycle. As citrate accumulates, glycolysis slows down, and 
the supply of pyruvate and thus acetyl groups to the citric 
acid cycle decreases. If citrate consumption increases, either 
because of a demand for more ATP or because anabolic path-
ways are draining off intermediates of the citric acid cycle, gly-
colysis accelerates and meets the demand. Metabolic balance 
is augmented by the control of enzymes that catalyze other 
CONCEPT CHECK 10.6
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare the structures of a 
 carbohydrate and a fat (see Figures 5.3 and 5.9). What 
 features make fat a much better fuel?
2. Under what circumstances might your body synthesize 
fat!molecules?
3. VISUAL SKILLS What will happen in a muscle cell that has 
used up its supply of O2 and ATP? (Review Figures 10.17 
and!10.19.)
4. VISUAL SKILLS During intense exercise, can a muscle cell 
use fat as a concentrated source of chemical energy? Explain. 
(Review Figures 10.17 and 10.18.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 10.1
Catabolic pathways yield energy by oxidizing organic 
fuels (pp. 237–241)
• Cells break down glucose and other organic fuels to yield chemi-
cal energy in the form of ATP . Fermentation is a process that 
results in the partial degradation of glucose without the use of 
oxygen (O2). The process of cellular respiration is a more  
complete breakdown of glucose. In aerobic respiration, O2 is 
used as a reactant; in  anaerobic respiration, other substances are 
used in place of O2.
• The cell taps the energy stored in food molecules through redox 
reactions, in which one substance partially or totally shifts 
electrons to another. Oxidation is the total or partial loss of 
electrons, while reduction is the total or partial addition of elec-
trons. During aerobic respiration, glucose (C6H12O6) is oxidized to 
CO2, and O2 is reduced to H2O :
becomes oxidized
C6H12O6 6 O2 6 CO2 6 H2O Energy
becomes reduced
1 11
• Electrons lose potential energy during their transfer from glucose 
or other organic compounds to O2. Electrons are usually passed 
first to NAD/uni002B.bold, reducing it to NADH, and are then passed from 
NADH to an electron transport chain, which conducts the 
electrons to O2 in energy-releasing steps. The energy that is re-
leased is used to make ATP .
• Aerobic respiration occurs in three stages: (1) glycolysis, (2) py-
ruvate oxidation and the citric acid cycle, and (3) oxidative 
phosphorylation (electron transport and chemiosmosis).
?  Describe the difference between the two processes in cellular 
respiration that produce ATP: oxidative phosphorylation and 
substrate-level phosphorylation.
CONCEPT 10.2
Glycolysis harvests chemical energy by oxidizing 
glucose to pyruvate (pp. 242–243)
• Glycolysis (“splitting of sugar”) is a series of reactions that breaks 
down glucose into two pyruvate molecules, which may go on to 
enter the citric acid cycle, and nets 2 ATP and 2 NADH per glucose 
molecule.
GLYCOLYSIS
Glucose
Inputs Outputs
2 Pyruvate   +   2 2+ATP NADH
?  Which reactions in glycolysis are the source of energy for the 
formation of ATP and NADH?
256 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   256 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 258 ===

 CHAPTER 10  Cell Respiration 257
CONCEPT 10.3
After pyruvate is oxidized, the citric acid cycle 
completes the energy-yielding oxidation of organic 
molecules (pp. 243–246)
• In eukaryotic cells, pyruvate enters the mitochondrion and is 
 oxidized to acetyl CoA, which is further oxidized in the citric 
acid cycle.
2 Pyruvate
2 Oxaloacetate
2 Acetyl CoA
2
8
6
2ATP
CO2
Inputs Outputs
FADH2
NADH
CITRIC 
ACID
CYCLE
?  What molecular products indicate the complete oxidation of glucose 
during cellular respiration?
CONCEPT 10.4
During oxidative phosphorylation,  
chemiosmosis couples electron transport  
to ATP synthesis (pp. 246–251)
• NADH and FADH2 transfer electrons to the electron transport 
chain. Electrons move down the chain, losing energy in several 
energy-releasing steps. Finally, electrons are passed to O2, reduc-
ing it to H2O.
I
NAD+
III
IV
12
II
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
NADH
FADH2
H2O2 H+ +      O2FAD
(carrying electrons from food)
MITOCHONDRIAL MATRIX
INTERMEMBRANE 
SPACE
Protein complex
of electron
carriers
Cyt c
Q
• Along the electron transport 
chain, electron transfer causes 
protein complexes to move H+ 
from the mitochondrial matrix 
(in eukaryotes) to the intermem-
brane space, storing energy as a 
proton-motive force (H+ gradi-
ent). As H+ diffuses back into the 
matrix through ATP synthase, 
its passage drives the phosphory-
lation of ADP to form ATP , called 
chemiosmosis.
• About 34% of the energy stored 
in a glucose molecule is trans-
ferred to ATP during cellular res-
piration, producing a maximum of about 32 ATP .
?  Briefly explain the mechanism by which ATP synthase produces ATP. 
List three locations in which ATP synthases are found.
INTER-
MEMBRANE
SPACE
MITO-
CHONDRIAL
MATRIX
H+
H+
ATP
synthase
ADP +Pi H+ ATP
CONCEPT 10.5
Fermentation and anaerobic respiration enable cells 
to produce ATP without the use of oxygen (pp. 251–254)
• Glycolysis nets 2 ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation, whether 
O2 is present or not. Under anaerobic conditions, anaerobic res-
piration or fermentation can take place. In anaerobic respiration, 
an electron transport chain is present with a final electron accep-
tor other than oxygen. In fermentation, the electrons from NADH 
are passed to pyruvate or a derivative of pyruvate, regenerating 
the NAD+ required to oxidize more glucose. Two common types 
of fermentation are  alcohol fermentation and lactic acid 
fermentation.
• Fermentation, anaerobic respiration, and aerobic respiration 
all use glycolysis to oxidize glucose, but they differ in their final 
electron acceptor and whether an electron transport chain is used 
(respiration) or not (fermentation). Respiration yields more ATP; 
aerobic respiration, with O2 as the final electron acceptor, yields 
about 16 times as much ATP as does fermentation.
• Glycolysis occurs in nearly all organisms and is thought to 
have evolved in ancient prokaryotes before there was O2 in the 
atmosphere.
?  Which process yields more ATP, fermentation or anaerobic 
respiration? Explain.
CONCEPT 10.6
Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle connect to many 
other metabolic pathways (pp. 254–256)
• Catabolic pathways funnel electrons from many kinds of organic 
molecules into cellular respiration. Many carbohydrates can 
enter glycolysis, most often after conversion to glucose. Amino 
acids of proteins must be deaminated before being oxidized. The 
fatty acids of fats undergo beta oxidation to two-carbon frag-
ments and then enter the citric acid cycle as acetyl CoA. Anabolic 
pathways can use small molecules from food directly or build 
other substances using intermediates of glycolysis or the citric 
acid cycle.
• Cellular respiration is controlled by allosteric enzymes at key 
points in glycolysis and the citric acid cycle.
?  Describe how the catabolic pathways of glycolysis and the citric 
acid cycle intersect with anabolic pathways in the metabolism of 
a cell.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
8. MAKE CONNECTIONS Step 3 in Figure 10.8 is a major point! 
of!regulation of glycolysis. The enzyme phosphofructokinase  
is allosterically regulated by ATP and related molecules  
(see Concept 6.5). Considering the overall result of glycolysis, 
would you expect ATP to inhibit or stimulate activity of this 
enzyme? Explain. (Hint: Make sure you consider the role of ATP 
as an allosteric regulator, not as!a!substrate of the enzyme.)
9. MAKE CONNECTIONS The proton pump shown in 
Figures!8.18 and 8.19 is a type of ATP synthase like that in 
Figure!10.13. Compare the processes shown in the three figures, 
and say whether they are involved in active or passive transport 
(see!also Concepts 8.3 and 8.4).
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   257 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 259 ===

258 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
13. EVOLUTION CONNECTION ATP synthases are found in 
the prokaryotic plasma membrane and in mitochondria 
and chloroplasts. (a) Propose a hypothesis to account for an 
evolutionary relationship of these eukaryotic organelles and 
prokaryotes. (b) Explain how the amino acid sequences of the 
ATP synthases from the different sources might either support 
or fail to support your hypothesis.
14. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY In the 1930s, some physicians 
prescribed low doses of a compound called dinitrophenol 
(DNP) to help patients lose weight. This unsafe method was 
abandoned after some patients died. DNP uncouples the 
chemiosmotic machinery by making the lipid bilayer of the 
inner mitochondrial membrane leaky to H+. Explain how this 
could cause weight loss and death.
15. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION In a short 
essay (100–150 words), explain how cells can harvest chemical 
energy with or without cellular respiration.
16. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Coenzyme Q (CoQ) is sold as a nutritional 
supplement. One company uses this 
marketing slogan for CoQ: “Give your heart 
the fuel it craves most.” Considering the role 
of coenzyme Q, critique this claim. How do 
you think this product might function to 
benefit the heart? Is CoQ used as a “fuel” 
during cellular respiration?
10. VISUAL SKILLS This computer 
model shows the four parts 
of ATP synthase, each part 
consisting of a number of 
polypeptide subunits (the solid 
gray part is still an area of active 
research). Using Figure!10.13 as 
a guide, label the rotor, stator, 
internal rod, and catalytic knob 
of this molecular motor.
11. INTERPRET THE DATA  
Phos phofructokinase is an 
enzyme that acts on fructose 
6-phosphate at an early step in 
glucose breakdown. Regulation 
of this enzyme controls whether 
the sugar will continue on in the 
glycolytic pathway. Considering 
this graph, under which condition 
is phosphofructokinase more 
active? Given what you know 
about glycolysis and regulation 
of metabolism by this enzyme, 
explain the mechanism by 
which phosphofructokinase 
activity differs depending on ATP 
concentration. Explain why it 
makes sense that regulation of 
this enzyme has evolved so that it 
works this way.
12. DRAW IT The graph here shows 
the pH difference across the 
inner mitochondrial membrane 
over time in an actively respiring 
cell. At the time indicated by the 
vertical arrow, a metabolic poison 
is added that specifically and 
completely inhibits all function of 
mitochondrial ATP synthase. Draw 
what you would expect to see for 
the rest of the graphed line over the 
next short period of time. Explain.
Fructose 6-phosphate
concentration
Low ATP
concentration
High ATP
concentration
Phosphofructokinase
activity
Time
pH difference
across membrane
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C10_PRF.indd   258 14/03/20   5:31 AM

=== SIDE 260 ===

259
Figure 11.1 Each leaf of this tree is harvesting energy from sunlight and using it 
to convert CO2 and H2O into chemical energy stored in sugar and other organic 
molecules. The tree uses these sugars for energy and to build its own trunk, branches, 
and leaves. Remarkably, enough sugars are left over to feed other organisms (like 
moth larvae, shown below) that cannot carry out this extraordinary transformation.
Photosynthetic Processes11
ATP
Light
energy
Cellular respiration 
generates
Plant
cell Chloroplast
Heat
Photosynthesis in chloroplasts
CO2 + H2O
Organic
molecules +  O2
How do photosynthetic cells use light to change carbon
dioxide and water into organic molecules and oxygen?
generates used in
used in
generates
KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 11
• BioFlix® Animation: Photosynthesis
• Figure 11.13 Walkthrough: How Linear 
Electron Flow During the Light Reactions 
Generates ATP and NADPH
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: The Light Reactions
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Photosynthesis
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• The Light Reactions (Concept 11.3)
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Draw a 
cell with a large chloroplast, labeling 
the parts of the chloroplast. As you go 
through the chapter, add key reactions 
for each stage of 
photosynthesis, 
linking the stages 
together. Label the 
carbon molecule(s) 
with the most energy 
and the carbon 
molecule(s) with the 
least energy. 
11.1 Photosynthesis feeds the  
biosphere p. 260
11.2 Photosynthesis converts light 
energy to the chemical energy  
of food p. 261
11.3 The light reactions convert solar 
energy to the chemical energy  
of ATP and NADPH p. 264
11.4 The Calvin cycle uses the chemical 
energy of ATP and NADPH to 
reduce CO2 to sugar p. 273
11.5 Alternative mechanisms of carbon 
fixation have evolved in hot, arid 
climates p. 275
11.6 Photosynthesis is essential for life 
on Earth: a review p. 278
Chloroplast
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   259 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 261 ===

260 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
CONCEPT 11.1
Photosynthesis feeds the biosphere
The conversion process that transforms the energy of sun-
light into chemical energy stored in sugars and other organic 
molecules is called photosynthesis. Let’s begin by placing 
photosynthesis in its ecological context.
Photosynthesis nourishes almost the entire living world 
directly or indirectly. An organism acquires the organic 
compounds it uses for energy and carbon skeletons by one 
of two major modes: autotrophic nutrition or heterotro-
phic nutrition. Autotrophs are “self-feeders” (auto- means 
“self,” and trophos means “feeder”); they sustain themselves 
without eating anything derived from other living beings. 
Autotrophs produce their organic molecules from CO2 and 
other inorganic raw materials obtained from the environ-
ment. They are the ultimate sources of organic compounds 
for all nonautotrophic organisms, and for this reason, biol-
ogists refer to autotrophs as the producers of the biosphere.
Almost all plants are autotrophs; the only nutrients they 
require are water and minerals from the soil and CO2 from the 
air. Specifically, plants are photoautotrophs, organisms that 
use light as a source of energy to synthesize organic substances  
(Figure 11.1). Photosynthesis also occurs in algae, certain other 
protists, and some prokaryotes (Figure 11.2). In this chapter, we 
will touch on these other groups in passing, but our emphasis 
will be on plants. Variations in autotrophic nutrition that occur 
in prokaryotes and algae will be described in Concept 27.3.
Heterotrophs are unable to make their own food; they 
live on compounds produced by other organisms (hetero- 
means “other”). Heterotrophs are the biosphere’s consumers. 
The most obvious “other-feeding” occurs when an animal 
eats plants or other organisms, but heterotrophic nutri-
tion may be more subtle. Some heterotrophs consume the 
remains of other organisms and organic litter such as feces, 
and fallen leaves; these types of heterotrophs are known as 
decomposers. Most fungi and many types of prokaryotes get 
their nourishment this way. Earth’s supply of fossil fuels was 
formed from remains of organisms that died hundreds of 
millions of years ago. In a sense, then, fossil fuels represent 
stores of the sun’s energy from the distant past. Almost all 
heterotrophs, including humans, are completely dependent, 
either directly or indirectly, on photoautotrophs for food—
and also for oxygen, a by-product of photosynthesis.
CONCEPT CHECK 11.1
1. Why are heterotrophs dependent on autotrophs?
2. WHAT IF? Fossil fuels are being depleted faster than they are 
replenished. Therefore, researchers are developing ways to pro-
duce “biodiesel” from the products of photosynthetic algae. They 
have proposed placing containers of these algae near industrial 
plants or highly congested city streets. Considering the process of 
photosynthesis, how does this arrangement make sense?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
(e) Purple sulfur bacteria
1 om
(a) Plants
(b) Multicellular alga
(c) Unicellular protists
10 om
(d) Cyanobacteria 20 om
. Figure 11.2 Photoautotrophs. These organisms use light 
energy to drive the synthesis of organic molecules from carbon 
dioxide and (in most cases) water. They feed themselves and 
the entire living world. On land, (a) plants are the predominant 
producers of food. In aquatic environments, photoautotrophs 
include unicellular and (b) multicellular algae, such as this kelp; 
(c) some non-algal unicellular protists, such as Euglena; (d) the 
prokaryotes called cyanobacteria; and (e) other photosynthetic 
prokaryotes, such as these purple sulfur bacteria, which produce 
sulfur (the yellow globules within the cells) (c–e, LMs).
 Mastering Biology B i o F l i x® Animation: The Flow of Carbon 
Atoms in Producers, Consumers, and Decomposers
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   260 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 262 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 261
Stomata
Outer
membrane
Intermembrane
space
Inner
membrane
Thylakoid
space
Thylakoid
Chloroplast
Granum
Stroma
Leaf cross section
Chloroplast 
VeinChloroplasts
Mesophyll
cell
Mesophyll
1 om
20 om
Mesophyll cell
O2CO2
m Figure 11.3 Zooming in on the location of photosynthesis in a 
plant. Leaves are the major organs of photosynthesis in plants. These 
images take you into a leaf, then into a cell, and finally into a chloroplast, 
the organelle where photosynthesis occurs (middle, LM; bottom, TEM).
CONCEPT 11.2
Photosynthesis converts light energy 
to the chemical energy of food
The remarkable ability of an organism to harness light energy 
and use it to drive the synthesis of organic compounds emerges 
from structural organization in the cell: Photosynthetic 
enzymes and other molecules are grouped together as special-
ized molecular complexes in a biological membrane, enabling 
the necessary series of chemical reactions to be carried out 
efficiently. The process of photosynthesis most likely origi-
nated in a group of bacteria that had infolded regions of the 
plasma membrane containing clusters of such molecules. In 
existing photosynthetic bacteria, infolded photosynthetic 
membranes function similarly to the internal membranes of 
the chloroplast, the eukaryotic organelle that absorbs energy 
from sunlight and uses it to drive the synthesis of organic com-
pounds from carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). According 
to what has come to be known as the endosymbiont theory, the 
original chloroplast was a photosynthetic prokaryote that 
lived inside an ancestor of eukaryotic cells. (You learned about 
this theory in Concept 7.5, and it will be described more fully 
in Concept 25.3.) Chloroplasts are present in a variety of pho-
tosynthesizing organisms (see some examples in Figure 11.2); 
in this chapter we focus on chloroplasts in plants, while men-
tioning prokaryotes from time to time.
Chloroplasts:  
The Sites of Photosynthesis in Plants
All green parts of a plant, including green stems and unrip-
ened fruit, have chloroplasts, but the leaves are the major 
sites of photosynthesis in most plants (Figure 11.3). There 
are about half a million chloroplasts in a chunk of leaf with a 
top surface area of 1 mm2. Chloroplasts are found mainly in 
the cells of the mesophyll, the tissue in the interior of the 
leaf. CO2 enters the leaf, and O2 exits, by way of microscopic 
pores called stomata (singular, stoma; from the Greek, mean-
ing “mouth”). Water absorbed by the roots is delivered to the 
leaves in veins. Leaves also use veins to export sugar to roots 
and other nonphotosynthetic parts of the plant.
A typical mesophyll cell has about 30–40 chloroplasts, 
each measuring about 2–4 µm by 4–7 µm. A chloroplast has 
two membranes surrounding a dense fluid called the stroma. 
Suspended within the stroma is a third membrane system, 
made up of sacs called thylakoids, which segregates the 
stroma from the thylakoid space inside these sacs. In some 
places, thylakoid sacs are stacked in columns called grana (sin-
gular, granum). Chlorophyll, the green pigment that gives 
leaves their color, resides in the thylakoid membranes of the 
chloroplast. (The internal photosynthetic membranes of some 
prokaryotes are also called thylakoid membranes; see Figure 
27.8b.) It is the light energy absorbed by chlorophyll that 
 Mastering Biology Video: Chloroplasts in Motion
drives the synthesis of organic molecules in the chloroplast. 
Now that we have looked at the sites of photosynthesis in 
plants, we are ready to look more closely at the process itself.
Tracking Atoms Through Photosynthesis
Scientists have tried for centuries to piece together the process by 
which plants make food. Although some of the steps are still not 
completely understood, the overall photosynthetic equation has 
been known since the 1800s: In the presence of light, the green 
parts of plants produce organic compounds and O2 from CO2 
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   261 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 263 ===

262 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
proposing that all photosynthetic organisms require a hydro-
gen source but that the source varies:
Sulfur bacteria: CO2 +2 H2SS[CH2O]+H2O+2 S
Plants:   CO2   +2 H2OS[CH2O]+H2O+O2
General: CO2+2 H2XS [ C H2O]+H2O+2 X
Thus, van Niel hypothesized that plants split H2O as a source of 
electrons from hydrogen atoms, releasing O2 as a by-product.
Nearly 20 years later, scientists confirmed van Niel’s 
hypothesis by using oxygen-18 (18O), a heavy isotope, as a 
tracer to follow the path of oxygen atoms during photosyn-
thesis. The experiments showed that the O2 produced by 
plants was labeled with 18O only if water was the source of the 
tracer (experiment 1). If the 18O was introduced to the plant 
in the form of CO2, the label did not turn up in the released 
O2 (experiment 2). In the following summary, green denotes 
labeled atoms of oxygen (18O):
Experiment 1:  CO2+2 H2OS3CH2O4+H2O+O2
Experiment 2:  CO2+2 H2OS3CH2O4+H2O+O2
A significant result of the shuffling of atoms during pho-
tosynthesis is the extraction of hydrogen from water and its 
incorporation into sugar. The waste product of photosynthe-
sis, O2, is released to the atmosphere. Figure 11.4 shows the 
fates of all atoms in photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis as a Redox Process
Let’s briefly compare photosynthesis with cellular respiration. 
Both processes involve redox reactions. During cellular respira-
tion, energy is released from sugar when electrons associated 
with hydrogen are transported by carriers to oxygen, forming 
water as a by-product (see Concept 10.1). The electrons lose 
potential energy as they “fall” down the electron transport 
chain toward electronegative oxygen, and the mitochondrion 
harnesses that energy to synthesize ATP (see Figure 10.14). 
Photosynthesis reverses the direction of electron flow. Water is 
split, and its electrons are transferred along with hydrogen ions 
(H+) from the water to carbon dioxide, reducing it to sugar.
becomes reduced
becomes oxidized
C6H12O66 CO2 6 O26 H2OEnergy11 1
and H2O. We can summarize the complex series of chemical 
reactions in photosynthesis with this chemical equation:
6 CO2+12 H2O+Light  energySC6H12O6+6 O2+6 H2O
We use glucose (C6H12O6) here to simplify the relationship 
between photosynthesis and respiration, but the direct prod-
uct of photosynthesis is actually a three-carbon sugar that can 
be used to make glucose. Water appears on both sides of the 
equation because 12 molecules are consumed and 6 molecules 
are newly formed during photosynthesis. We can simplify the 
equation by indicating only the net consumption of water:
6 CO2+6 H2O+Light  energySC6H12O6+6 O2
Writing the equation in this form, we can see that the overall 
chemical change during photosynthesis is the reverse of the 
one that occurs during cellular respiration (see Concept 10.1). 
It is important to realize that both of these metabolic pro-
cesses occur in plant cells. However, as you will soon learn, 
chloroplasts do not synthesize sugars by simply reversing the 
steps of respiration.
Now let’s divide the photosynthetic equation by 6 to put it 
in its simplest possible form:
CO2+H2OS3CH2O4+O2
Here, the brackets indicate that CH2O is not an actual sugar 
but represents the general formula for a carbohydrate (see 
Concept 5.2). In other words, we are imagining the synthesis 
of a sugar molecule one carbon at a time (with six repetitions 
theoretically adding up to a glucose molecule: C6H12O6). Let’s 
now see how researchers tracked the elements C, H, and O 
from the reactants of photosynthesis to the products.
The Splitting of Water: Scientific Inquiry
One of the first clues to the mechanism of photosynthesis came 
from the discovery that the O2 given off by plants is derived 
from H2O and not from CO2. The chloroplast splits water 
into hydrogen and oxygen atoms. Before this discovery, the 
prevailing hypothesis was that photosynthesis split carbon 
dioxide (CO2SC+O2) and then added water to the carbon 
(C+H2OS[CH2O]). That hypothesis predicted that the O2 
released during photosynthesis came from CO2, an idea chal-
lenged in the 1930s by C. B. van Niel, of Stanford University. 
Van Niel was investigating photosynthesis in bacteria that 
make their carbohydrate from CO2 but do not release O2. He 
concluded that, at least in these bacteria, CO2 is not split into 
carbon and oxygen. One group of bacteria used hydrogen sul-
fide (H2S) rather than water for photosynthesis, forming yellow 
globules of sulfur as a waste product (these globules are visible 
in Figure 11.2e). Here is the chemical equation for photosyn-
thesis in these sulfur bacteria:
CO2 +2 H2SS[CH2O]+H2O+2 S
Van Niel reasoned that the bacteria split H2S and used the 
hydrogen atoms to make sugar. He then generalized that idea, 
Reactants: 
Products:
6 CO2
C6H12O6 6 O26 H2O
12 H2O
. Figure 11.4 Tracking atoms through photosynthesis. The 
atoms from CO2 are shown in magenta, and the atoms from H2O 
are shown in blue.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   262 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 264 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 263
two compounds: NADPH and ATP. NADPH, a source of elec-
trons, acts as “reducing power” that can be passed along to an 
electron acceptor, reducing it, while ATP is the versatile energy 
currency of cells. Notice that the light reactions produce no 
sugar; that happens in the second stage of photosynthesis, the 
Calvin cycle.
The Calvin cycle is named for Melvin Calvin, who, along 
with his colleagues James Bassham and Andrew Benson, 
began to elucidate its steps in the late 1940s. The cycle 
begins by incorporating CO2 from the air into organic 
molecules already present in the chloroplast. This initial 
incorporation of carbon into organic compounds is known 
as carbon fixation. The Calvin cycle then reduces the 
fixed carbon to carbohydrate by the addition of electrons. 
The reducing power is provided by NADPH, which acquired 
its cargo of electrons in the light reactions. To convert CO2 
to carbohydrate, the Calvin cycle also requires chemical 
energy in the form of ATP, which is also generated by the 
light reactions. Thus, it is the Calvin cycle that makes sugar, 
but it can do so only with the help of the NADPH and ATP 
produced by the light reactions. The metabolic steps of 
the Calvin cycle are sometimes referred to as the dark reac-
tions, or light-independent reactions, because none of the 
steps requires light directly. Nevertheless, the Calvin cycle 
in most plants occurs during daylight, for only then can 
the light reactions provide the NADPH and ATP that the 
Calvin cycle requires. In essence, the chloroplast uses light 
energy to make sugar by coordinating the two stages of 
photosynthesis.
Because the electrons increase in potential energy as they 
move from water to sugar, this process requires energy—in 
other words, it is endergonic. This energy boost that occurs 
during photosynthesis is provided by light.
The Two Stages of Photosynthesis: A Preview
The equation for photosynthesis is a deceptively  simple 
 s u m m a r y  o f  a  v e r y  c o m p l e x  p r o c e s s .  A c t u a l l y ,  p h o t o s y n-
thesis is not a single process, but two processes, each of 
which has multiple steps. These two stages of photosyn-
thesis are known as the light reactions (the photo part 
of photosynthesis) and the Calvin cycle (the synthesis 
part) (Figure 11.5).
The light reactions are the steps of photosynthesis that con-
vert solar energy to chemical energy. Water is split, providing a 
source of electrons and protons (hydrogen ions, H+) and giving 
off O2 as a by-product. Light absorbed by chlorophyll drives a 
transfer of the electrons and hydrogen ions from water to an 
acceptor called NADP1 (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate), where they are temporarily stored. (The electron 
acceptor NADP+ is first cousin to NAD+, which functions as 
an electron carrier in cellular respiration; the two molecules 
differ only by the presence of an extra phosphate group in 
the NADP+ molecule.) The light reactions use solar energy 
to reduce NADP+ to NADPH by adding a pair of electrons 
along with an H+. The light reactions also generate ATP, using 
chemiosmosis to power the addition of a phosphate group to 
ADP, a process called photophosphorylation. Thus, light 
energy is initially converted to chemical energy in the form of 
 Mastering Biology  
BioFlix® Animation: Photosynthesis
Light
Chloroplast
Thylakoid Stroma
O2
CALVIN
CYCLE
LIGHT
REACTIONS
[CH2O]
(sugar)
NADPH
NADP+
ADP
+
Pi
H2O CO2
ATP
c Figure 11.5 An overview of 
photosynthesis: cooperation of the 
light reactions and the Calvin cycle. In 
the chloroplast, the thylakoid membranes 
(green) are the sites of the light reactions, 
whereas the Calvin cycle occurs in the 
stroma (gray). The light reactions use solar 
energy to make ATP and NADPH, which 
supply chemical energy and reducing 
power, respectively, to the Calvin cycle. 
The Calvin cycle incorporates CO2 into 
organic molecules, which are converted to 
sugar. (Recall that most simple sugars have 
formulas that are some multiple of CH2O.) 
To visualize these processes in their cellular 
context, see Figure 7.32.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   263 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 265 ===

264 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
visible light because it can be detected as various colors by 
the human eye.
The model of light as waves explains many of light’s 
properties, but in certain respects light behaves as though 
it consists of discrete particles, called photons. Photons 
are not tangible objects, but they act like objects in that 
each of them has a fixed quantity of energy. The amount 
of energy is inversely related to the wavelength of the 
light: The shorter the wavelength, the greater the energy 
of each photon of that light. Thus, a photon of violet light 
packs nearly twice as much energy as a photon of red light 
(see Figure 11.6).
Although the sun radiates the full spectrum of electromag-
netic energy, the atmosphere acts like a selective window, 
allowing visible light to pass through while screening out a 
substantial fraction of other radiation. The part of the spec-
trum we can see—visible light—is also the radiation that 
drives photosynthesis.
Photosynthetic Pigments:  
The Light Receptors
When light meets matter, it may be reflected, transmitted, or 
absorbed. Substances that absorb visible light are known as 
pigments. Different pigments absorb light of different wave-
lengths, and the wavelengths that are absorbed disappear. If a 
pigment is illuminated with white light, the color we see is the 
color most reflected or transmitted by the pigment. (If a pig-
ment absorbs all wavelengths, it appears black.) We see green 
when we look at a leaf because chlorophyll absorbs violet-blue 
and red light while transmitting and reflecting green light 
As Figure 11.5 indicates, the thylakoids of the chloroplast 
are the sites of the light reactions, while the Calvin cycle 
occurs in the stroma. On the outside of the thylakoids, dur-
ing the light reactions, molecules of NADP+ and ADP pick 
up electrons and phosphate, respectively, and NADPH and 
ATP are then released to the stroma, where they play crucial 
roles in the Calvin cycle. The two stages of photosynthesis are 
treated in this figure as metabolic modules that take in ingre-
dients and crank out products. In the next two sections, we’ll 
look more closely at how the two stages work, beginning with 
the light reactions.
CONCEPT CHECK 11.2
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS How do the CO2 molecules used in 
photosynthesis reach and enter the chloroplasts inside leaf 
cells? (See Concept 8.2.)
2. How does the endosymbiont theory account for similarities 
between photosynthetic bacteria and eukaryotic chloroplasts?
3. WHAT IF? The Calvin cycle requires ATP and NADPH, 
products of the light reactions. If a classmate asserted that 
the light reactions don’t depend on the Calvin cycle and, 
with continual light, could just keep on producing ATP and 
NADPH, how would you respond?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 11.3
The light reactions convert solar 
energy to the chemical energy  
of ATP and NADPH
Chloroplasts are chemical factories powered by the sun. Their 
thylakoids transform light energy into the chemical energy 
of ATP and NADPH. To better understand the conversion of 
light to chemical energy, we need to know about some impor-
tant properties of light.
The Nature of Sunlight
Light is a form of energy known as electromagnetic energy, 
also called electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic energy 
travels in rhythmic waves analogous to those created by drop-
ping a pebble into a pond. Electromagnetic waves, however, 
are disturbances of electric and magnetic fields rather than 
disturbances of a material medium such as water.
The distance between the crests of electromagnetic waves 
is called the wavelength. Wavelengths range from less than 
a nanometer (for gamma rays) to more than a kilometer (for 
radio waves). This entire range of radiation is known as the 
electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 11.6). The segment 
most important to life is the narrow band from about  
380 nm to 740 nm in wavelength. This radiation is known as 
380 450 500 550 600 650 700 740 nm
Visible light
Gamma 
raysX-rays UV Infrared Micro-
waves
Radio
waves
10–5 nm 10–3 nm 1 nm 10 3 nm 106 nm
1 m
(109 nm)103 m
Longer wavelengthShorter wavelength
Lower energyHigher energy
. Figure 11.6 The electromagnetic spectrum. White light 
is a mixture of all wavelengths of visible light. A prism can sort 
white light into its component colors by bending light of different 
wavelengths at different angles. (Droplets of water in the 
atmosphere can act as prisms, causing a rainbow to form.) Visible 
light drives photosynthesis.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   264 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 266 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 265
(Figure 11.7). The ability of a pigment to absorb various wave-
lengths of light can be measured with an instrument called a 
spectrophotometer. This machine directs beams of light of 
different wavelengths through a solution of the pigment and 
measures the fraction of the light transmitted at each wave-
length. A graph plotting a pigment’s light absorption versus 
wavelength is called an absorption spectrum (Figure 11.8).
The absorption spectra of chloroplast pigments provide 
clues to the relative effectiveness of different wavelengths 
for driving photosynthesis since light can perform work 
in chloroplasts only if it is absorbed. Figure 11.9a shows 
the absorption spectra of three types of pigments in chlo-
roplasts: chlorophyll a, the key light-capturing pigment 
that participates directly in the light reactions; the accessory 
pigment chlorophyll b; and a separate group of accessory 
pigments called carotenoids. The spectrum of chlorophyll a  
suggests that violet-blue and red light work best for photo-
synthesis, since they are absorbed, while green is the least 
effective color. This is confirmed by an action spectrum 
for photosynthesis (Figure 11.9b), which profiles the rela-
tive effectiveness of different wavelengths of radiation 
in driving the process. An action spectrum is prepared by 
illuminating chloroplasts with light of different colors and 
then plotting wavelength against some measure of photo-
synthetic rate, such as CO2 consumption or O2 release. The 
action spectrum for photosynthesis was first demonstrated 
by Theodor W. Engelmann, a German botanist, in 1883. 
Chloroplast
Light
Reflected
light
Transmitted
light
Absorbed
light
Granum
. Figure 11.7 Why leaves are green: interaction of light 
with chloroplasts. The chlorophyll molecules of chloroplasts 
absorb violet-blue and red light (the colors most effective in driving 
photosynthesis) and reflect or transmit green light. This is why 
leaves appear green. Application A n  a b s o r p t i o n  s p e c t r u m  i s  a  v i s u a l  r e p r e s e n-
tation of how well a particular pigment absorbs different 
wavelengths of visible light. Absorption spectra of various 
chloroplast pigments help scientists decipher the role of 
each pigment in a plant.
Technique A spectrophotometer measures the relative 
amounts of light of different wavelengths absorbed and 
transmitted by a pigment solution.
1 White light is separated into colors (wavelengths) by  
a prism.
2 One by one, the different colors of light are passed through 
the sample (chlorophyll in this example). Green light and 
blue light are shown here.
3 The transmitted light strikes a photoelectric tube, which 
converts the light energy to electricity.
4 The electric current is measured by a galvanometer. The 
meter indicates the fraction of light transmitted through the 
sample, from which we can determine the amount of light 
absorbed.
White 
light
Refracting 
prism
Slit moves to 
pass light 
of selected 
wavelength.
Green
light
Chlorophyll
solution
Photoelectric
tube
Galvanometer
The low transmittance
(high absorption)
reading indicates that
chlorophyll absorbs
most blue light.
The high transmittance
(low absorption)
reading indicates that
chlorophyll absorbs
very little green light.
Blue
light
1
23
4 0
0
100
100
Results S e e  F i g u r e  11.9a for absorption spectra of three 
types of chloroplast pigments.
Determining an Absorption Spectrum
. Figure 11.8 Research Method
Before equipment for measuring O2 levels had even been 
invented, Engelmann performed a clever experiment in 
which he used O2-requiring bacteria to measure rates of pho-
tosynthesis in filamentous algae (Figure 11.9c). His results 
are a striking match to the modern action spectrum shown 
in Figure 11.9b.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Light Energy and Pigments
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   265 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 267 ===

266 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Notice by comparing Figures 11.9a and 11.9b that the 
action spectrum for photosynthesis is much broader than the 
absorption spectrum of chlorophyll a. The absorption spec-
trum of chlorophyll a alone underestimates the effectiveness 
of certain wavelengths in driving photosynthesis. This is partly 
because accessory pigments with different absorption  spectra—
including chlorophyll b and carotenoids—broaden the spec-
trum of colors that can be used for photosynthesis. Figure 11.10  
shows the structure of chlorophyll a compared with that of 
chlorophyll b. A slight structural difference between them is 
enough to cause the two pigments to absorb at slightly differ-
ent wavelengths in the red and blue parts of the spectrum (see 
Figure 11.9a). As a result, chlorophyll a appears blue green and 
chlorophyll b olive green under visible light.
In the last decade, researchers have identified two other 
forms of chlorophyll—chlorophyll d and chlorophyll f—that 
absorb higher wavelengths of light. In 2018, researchers grew 
a species of cyanobacterium called Chroococcidiopsis thermalis 
N
Mg
N
NN
CHO in chlorophyll b
CH3  in chlorophyll a
O
O O
O
Porphyrin ring:
light-absorbing
“head” of molecule;
note magnesium
atom at center
CH3
Hydrocarbon tail: interacts with hydrophobic regions 
of proteins inside thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts
Chlorophyll a and b differ in only one functional group:
. Figure 11.10 Structure of chlorophyll a and b.
Experiment Absorption and action spectra, along with a 
classic experiment by Theodor W. Engelmann, reveal which 
wavelengths of light are photosynthetically important.
Results
400 500 600 700
Wavelength of light (nm)
Absorption of light by
chloroplast pigments
Chlorophyll b
Chloro-
phyll a
Carotenoids
(a)Absorption spectra. The three curves show the wavelengths of light
best absorbed by three types of chloroplast pigments.Rate of photosynthesis
(measured by O2 release)
Wavelength of light (nm)
(b)
400 500 600 700
Action spectrum. This graph plots the rate of photosynthesis 
versus wavelength. The resulting action spectrum resembles the 
absorption spectrum for chlorophyll a but does not match exactly 
(see part a). This is partly due to the absorption of light by accessory 
pigments such as chlorophyll b and carotenoids.
Filament
of alga
Aerobic bacteria
(c)
400 500 600 700
Engelmann‘s experiment. In 1883, Theodor W. Engelmann shined 
light through a prism onto an alga, exposing different segments of 
the alga to different wavelengths. He used aerobic bacteria, which 
congregate near an oxygen source, to determine which segments of 
the alga were releasing the most O2 and thus photosynthesizing 
most. Bacteria congregated in greatest numbers around the parts of 
the alga illuminated with violet-blue or red light.
Wavelength of light (nm)
Conclusion The action spectra, confirmed by Engelmann’s 
experiment, show which portions of the spectrum are most 
effective in driving photosynthesis.
Which wavelengths of light are most effective 
in driving photosynthesis?
. Figure 11.9 Inquiry
Data from T .  W .  E n g e l m a n n ,  Bacterium photometricum. Ein Beitrag zur vergleichen-
den Physiologie des Licht-und Farbensinnes, Archiv. für Physiologie 30:95–124 (1883).
INTERPRET THE DATA A c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  g r a p h ,  w h i c h  w a v e-
lengths of light drive the highest rates of photosynthesis?
  Instructors: A related Experimental Inquiry Tutorial can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Space-Filling Model of  Chlorophyll
c Colony of the cyanobacteria 
Chroococcidiopsis thermalis. In 
this micrograph of cells becoming 
acclimated to higher wavelengths 
of light, cells that haven’t yet 
acclimated and are still using 
chlorophyll a for photosynthesis 
appear purplish-pink, and cells 
that have acclimated and are 
using chlorophyll f appear yellow.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   266 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 268 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 267
of a photon boosts an electron to an orbital of higher energy, 
and the pigment molecule is then said to be in an excited state. 
The only photons absorbed are those whose energy is exactly 
equal to the energy difference between the ground state and an 
excited state, and this energy difference varies from one kind 
of molecule to another. Thus, a particular compound absorbs 
only photons corresponding to specific wavelengths, which is 
why each pigment has a unique absorption spectrum.
Once absorption of a photon raises an electron to an  
excited state, the electron cannot stay there long (Figure 11.11a).  
The excited state, like all high-energy states, is unstable. 
Generally, when isolated pigment molecules absorb light, 
their excited electrons drop back down to the ground-state 
orbital in a billionth of a second, releasing their excess energy 
as heat. This conversion of light energy to heat is what makes 
the top of an automobile so hot on a sunny day. (White cars 
are coolest because their paint reflects all wavelengths of vis-
ible light.) In isolation, some pigments, including chlorophyll, 
emit light as well as heat after absorbing photons. As excited 
electrons fall back to the ground state, photons are given off, 
an afterglow called fluorescence. An illuminated solution of 
chlorophyll isolated from chloroplasts will fluoresce in the red 
part of the spectrum and also give off heat (Figure 11.11b). 
This is best seen by illuminating with ultraviolet light, which 
chlorophyll can also absorb (see Figures 11.6 and 11.9a). 
Viewed under visible light, the fluorescence would be difficult 
to see against the green of the solution.
A Photosystem: A Reaction-Center Complex 
Associated with Light-Harvesting Complexes
Chlorophyll molecules excited by the absorption of light 
energy produce very different results in an intact chloroplast 
than they do in isolation (see Figure 11.11). In their native 
environment of the thylakoid membrane, chlorophyll 
under only far-red light with a wavelength of 750 nm. They 
concluded that chlorophyll f was functioning in place of 
chlorophyll a, enabling this cyanobacterium to flourish in 
very shaded conditions. Higher-wavelength light has less 
energy, so this observation extends the lower limit of energy 
(the “red limit”) needed for photosynthesis to occur.
Other accessory pigments include carotenoids, hydro-
carbons that are various shades of yellow and orange because 
they absorb violet and blue-green light (see Figure 11.9a). 
Carotenoids may broaden the spectrum of colors that can drive 
photosynthesis. However, a more important function of at least 
some carotenoids seems to be photoprotection: These compounds 
absorb and dissipate excessive light energy that would otherwise 
damage chlorophyll or interact with oxygen, forming reactive 
oxidative molecules that are dangerous to the cell. Interestingly, 
carotenoids similar to the photoprotective ones in chloroplasts 
have a photoprotective role in the human eye. (Carrots, known 
for aiding night vision, are rich in carotenoids.) These and 
related molecules are, of course, found naturally in many veg-
etables and fruits. They are also often advertised in health food 
products as “phytochemicals” (from the Greek phyton, plant), 
some of which have antioxidant properties. Plants can synthe-
size all the antioxidants they require, but humans and other 
animals must obtain some of them from their diets.
Excitation of Chlorophyll by Light
What exactly happens when chlorophyll and other pigments 
absorb light? The colors corresponding to the absorbed wave-
lengths disappear from the spectrum of the transmitted and 
reflected light, but energy cannot disappear. When a molecule 
absorbs a photon of light, one of the molecule’s electrons is 
elevated to an orbital where it has more potential energy (see 
Figure 2.6b). When the electron is in its normal orbital, the 
pigment molecule is said to be in its ground state. Absorption 
Photon
Photon
(fluorescence)
Excited
state
Heat
Chlorophyll
molecule
e–
(a) Energy of electron
Excitation of isolated chlorophyll molecule (b)Fluorescence
Ground
state
c Figure 11.11 Excitation of isolated 
chlorophyll by light. (a) Absorption of a 
photon causes a transition of the chlorophyll 
molecule from its ground state to its excited 
state. The photon boosts an electron to an 
orbital where it has more potential energy. If 
the illuminated molecule exists in isolation, 
its excited electron immediately drops back 
down to the ground-state orbital, and 
its excess energy is given off as heat and 
fluorescence (light). (b) A chlorophyll solution 
excited with ultraviolet light fluoresces with a 
red-orange glow.
WHAT IF? If a leaf containing the same 
concentration of chlorophyll as in the solution 
was exposed to the same ultraviolet light, 
no fluorescence would be seen. Propose an 
explanation for the difference in fluorescence 
emission between the solution and the leaf.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   267 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 269 ===

268 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
organized association of proteins holding a special pair of 
chlorophyll a molecules and a primary electron acceptor. Each 
light-harvesting complex consists of various pigment 
molecules (which may include chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, 
and multiple carotenoids) bound to proteins. The number and 
variety of pigment molecules enable a photosystem to harvest 
light over a larger surface area and a larger portion of the spec-
trum than could any single pigment molecule alone. Together, 
these light-harvesting complexes act as an antenna for the 
reaction-center complex. When a pigment molecule absorbs 
a photon, the energy is transferred from pigment molecule to 
pigment molecule within a light-harvesting complex, like a 
human “wave” at a sports arena, until it is passed to the pair of 
chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction-center complex. This 
pair of chlorophyll a molecules is special because their molecu-
lar environment—their location and the other molecules with 
which they are associated—enables them to use the energy 
from light not only to boost one of their electrons to a higher 
energy level, but also to transfer it to a different molecule—the 
primary electron acceptor, which is a molecule capable of 
accepting electrons and becoming reduced.
The solar-powered transfer of an electron from the 
reaction-center chlorophyll a pair to the primary electron 
acceptor is the first step of the light reactions. As soon as the 
chlorophyll electron is excited to a higher energy level, the 
primary electron acceptor captures it; this is a redox reaction. 
In the flask shown in Figure 11.11b, isolated chlorophyll fluo-
resces because there is no electron acceptor, so electrons of 
photoexcited chlorophyll drop right back to the ground state. 
In the structured environment of a chloroplast, however, 
an electron acceptor is readily available, and the potential 
energy represented by the excited electron is not dissipated 
as light and heat. Thus, each photosystem—a reaction-center 
complex surrounded by light-harvesting complexes— 
functions in the chloroplast as a unit. It converts light energy 
to  chemical energy, which will ultimately be used for the 
 synthesis of sugar.
The thylakoid membrane is populated by two types of pho-
tosystems that cooperate in the light reactions of photosyn-
thesis: photosystem II (PS II) and photosystem I (PS I). 
(They were named in order of their discovery, but photosystem 
II functions first in the light reactions.) Each has a characteristic 
reaction-center complex—a particular kind of primary electron 
acceptor next to a special pair of chlorophyll a molecules asso-
ciated with specific proteins. The reaction-center chlorophyll a 
of photosystem II is known as P680 because this pigment is best 
at absorbing light having a wavelength of 680 nm (in the red 
part of the spectrum). The chlorophyll a at the reaction-center 
complex of photosystem I is called P700 because it most effec-
tively absorbs light of wavelength 700 nm (in the far-red part of 
the spectrum). These two pigments, P680 and P700, are nearly 
identical chlorophyll a molecules. However, their association 
with different proteins in the thylakoid membrane affects the 
molecules are organized along with other small organic mol-
ecules and proteins into complexes called photosystems.
A photosystem is composed of a reaction-center com-
plex surrounded by several light-harvesting complexes 
(Figure 11.12). The reaction-center complex is an 
(a)How a photosystem harvests light. When a photon strikes a pig-
ment molecule in a light-harvesting complex, the energy is passed 
from molecule to molecule until it reaches the reaction-center com-
plex. Here, an excited electron from the special pair of chlorophyll a
molecules is transferred to the primary electron acceptor.Thylakoid membrane
Transfer
of energy
THYLAKOID SPACE
(INTERIOR OF THYLAKOID)
Pigment
molecules
Primary
electron
acceptor
Photon
Thylakoid
STROMAPhotosystem
Reaction-
center complex
Light-harvesting
complexes
Special pair of
chlorophyll a
molecules
e–
. Figure 11.12 The structure and function of a photosystem.
Chlorophyll (green)
Thylakoid membrane
Protein
subunits
(purple)
STROMA
THYLAKOID
SPACE
(b)Structure of a photosystem. This computer model, based on 
X-ray crystallography, shows two photosystem complexes side by 
side. Chlorophyll molecules (bright green ball-and-stick models 
within the membrane; the tails are not shown) are interspersed 
with protein subunits (purple ribbons; notice the many c helices 
spanning the membrane). For simplicity, a photosystem will be 
shown as a single complex in the rest of the chapter.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   268 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 270 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 269
its ground state, an electron in a nearby pigment molecule 
is simultaneously raised to an excited state. The process 
continues, with the energy being relayed to other pigment 
molecules until it reaches the P680 pair of chlorophyll a 
molecules in the PS II reaction-center complex. It excites an 
electron in this pair of chlorophylls to a higher energy state.
2  T h i s  e l e c t r o n  i s  t r a n s f e r r e d  f r o m  t h e  e x c i t e d  P 6 8 0  t o  t h e  p r i-
mary electron acceptor. We can refer to the resulting form of 
P680, missing the negative charge of an electron, as P680+.
3  An enzyme catalyzes the splitting of a water molecule into 
two electrons, two hydrogen ions (H+), and an oxygen 
atom. The electrons are supplied one by one to the P680+ 
pair, each electron replacing one transferred to the primary 
electron acceptor. (P680+ is the strongest biological oxidiz-
ing agent known; its electron “hole” must be filled. This 
greatly facilitates the transfer of electrons from the split 
water molecule.) The H+ are released into the thylakoid 
space (interior of the thylakoid). The oxygen atom immedi-
ately combines with an oxygen atom generated by the split-
ting of another water molecule, forming O2.
electron distribution in the two pigments and accounts for the 
slight differences in their light-absorbing properties. Now let’s 
see how the two types of photosystems work together in using 
light energy to generate ATP and NADPH, the two main prod-
ucts of the light reactions.
Linear Electron Flow
Light drives the synthesis of ATP and NADPH by energizing 
the two types of photosystems embedded in the thylakoid 
membranes of chloroplasts. The key to this energy transfor-
mation is a flow of electrons through the photosystems and 
other molecular components built into the thylakoid mem-
brane. This is called linear electron flow, and it occurs 
during the light reactions of photosynthesis, as shown in 
Figure 11.13. The numbered steps in the text correspond to 
the numbered steps in the figure.
1  A photon of light strikes one of the pigment molecules in a 
light-harvesting complex of PS II, boosting one of its elec-
trons to a higher energy level. As this electron falls back to 
H2O
NADP+
reductase
Fd
Primary
electron
acceptorPrimary
electron
acceptor
Electron transport chain
Electrontransport
chain
Photosystem II
(PS II)
Photosystem I
(PS I)
Light Light
2 H+
+
  1/2  
ATP
Pc
1 5
6
7 8
4
3
2 Cytochrome
complex
P680
P700
Pq NADPH
NADP+
+ H+
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
H2O
O2
Pigment
molecules
NADP+
ADP
[CH2O] (sugar)
LIGHT
REACTIONS
CALVIN
CYCLE
ATP
NADPH
O2
CO2
Light
. Figure 11.13 How linear electron flow during the light 
reactions generates ATP and NADPH. The gold arrows trace 
the flow of light-driven electrons from water to NADPH. The black 
arrows trace the transfer of energy from pigment molecule to 
pigment molecule. To see these proteins in their cellular context, 
see Figure 7.32b.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   269 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 271 ===

270 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
The energy changes of electrons during their linear flow 
through the light reactions are shown in a mechanical 
analogy in Figure 11.14. Although the scheme shown in 
Figures 11.13 and 11.14 may seem complicated, do not lose 
track of the big picture: The light reactions use solar power to 
generate ATP and NADPH, which provide chemical energy 
and reducing power, respectively, to the carbohydrate- 
synthesizing reactions of the Calvin cycle.
Cyclic Electron Flow
In certain cases, photoexcited electrons can take an alter-
native path called cyclic electron flow, which uses 
photosystem I but not photosystem II. You can see in 
Figure 11.15 that cyclic flow is a short circuit: The elec-
trons cycle back from ferredoxin (Fd) to the cytochrome 
complex, then via a plastocyanin molecule (Pc) to a P700 
chlorophyll in the PS I reaction-center complex. There is 
4  E a c h  p h o t o e x c i t e d  e l e c t r o n  p a s s e s  f r o m  t h e  p r i m a r y  e l e c-
tron acceptor of PS II to PS I via an electron transport chain, 
the components of which are similar to those of the electron 
transport chain that functions in cellular respiration. The 
electron transport chain between PS II and PS I is made up of 
the electron carrier plastoquinone (Pq), a cytochrome com-
plex, and a protein called plastocyanin (Pc). Each compo-
nent carries out redox reactions as electrons flow down the 
electron transport chain, releasing free energy that is used to 
pump protons (H+) into the thylakoid space, contributing 
to a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane.
5  The potential energy stored in the proton gradient is used to 
make ATP in a process called chemiosmosis, to be discussed 
shortly.
6  Meanwhile, light energy has been transferred via light- 
harvesting complex pigments to the PS I reaction-center 
complex, exciting an electron of the P700 pair of chloro-
phyll a molecules located there. The photoexcited electron 
is then transferred to PS I’s primary electron acceptor, creat-
ing an electron “hole” in the P700—which we now can call 
P700+. In other words, P700+ can now act as an electron 
acceptor, accepting an electron that reaches the bottom  
of the electron transport chain from PS II.
7  Photoexcited electrons are passed in a series of redox 
reactions from the primary electron acceptor of PS I down 
a second electron transport chain through the protein 
ferredoxin (Fd). (This chain does not create a proton gradi-
ent and thus does not produce ATP.)
8  T h e  e n z y m e  NADP+ reductase catalyzes the transfer of 
electrons from Fd to NADP 
+. Two electrons are required 
for its reduction to NADPH. Electrons in NADPH are at 
a higher energy level than they are in water (where they 
started), so they are more readily available for the reac-
tions of the Calvin cycle. This process also removes an H+ 
from the stroma.
Photosystem II
Photosystem I
ATP
Pq
Fd
Primary
acceptor
Pc
Cytochrome
complex
Fd
NADP+
reductase
NADP+
 + H+
NADPH
Primary
acceptor
b Figure 11.15 Cyclic electron flow. 
Photoexcited electrons from PS I are 
occasionally shunted back from ferredoxin 
(Fd) to chlorophyll via the cytochrome 
complex and plastocyanin (Pc). This electron 
shunt supplements the supply of ATP (via 
chemiosmosis) but produces no NADPH. The 
“shadow” of linear electron flow is included 
in the diagram for comparison with the cyclic 
route. The two Fd molecules in this diagram 
are actually one and the same—the final 
electron carrier in the electron transport chain 
of PS I—although it is depicted twice to clearly 
show its role in two parts of the process.
Photon
Photon
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
Mill
makes
ATP NADPH
Photosystem IPhotosystem II
ATP
. Figure 11.14 A mechanical analogy for linear electron flow 
during the light reactions.
VISUAL SKILLS Look at Figure 11.14 and 
explain how you would alter it to show a 
mechanical analogy for cyclic electron flow.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   270 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 272 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 271
A Comparison of Chemiosmosis  
in Chloroplasts and Mitochondria
Chloroplasts and mitochondria generate ATP by the same 
basic mechanism: chemiosmosis (see Figure 10.14). An elec-
tron transport chain pumps protons (H+) across a membrane 
as electrons are passed through a series of carriers that have 
progressively more affinity for electrons. Thus, electron trans-
port chains transform redox energy to a proton-motive force, 
potential energy stored in the form of an H+ gradient across a 
membrane. An ATP synthase complex in the same membrane 
couples the diffusion of hydrogen ions down their gradient to 
the phosphorylation of ADP, forming ATP.
Some of the electron carriers, including the iron-containing 
proteins called cytochromes, are very similar in mitochondria 
and chloroplasts (see Figure 7.32b and c). The ATP synthase 
complexes of the two organelles are also quite similar. But 
there are noteworthy differences between photophosphoryla-
tion in chloroplasts and oxidative phosphorylation in mito-
chondria. Both work by way of chemiosmosis, but in chloro-
plasts, the high-energy electrons dropped down the transport 
chain come from water, while in mitochondria, they are 
extracted from organic molecules (which are thus oxidized). 
Chloroplasts do not need molecules from food to make ATP; 
their photosystems capture light energy and use it to drive the 
electrons from water to the top of the transport chain. In other 
words, mitochondria use chemiosmosis to transfer chemical 
energy from food molecules to ATP, whereas chloroplasts use 
it to transform light energy into chemical energy in ATP.
Although the spatial organization of chemiosmosis differs 
slightly between chloroplasts and mitochondria, it is easy to 
see similarities in the two (Figure 11.16). Electron transport 
no production of NADPH and no release of oxygen that 
results from this process. On the other hand, cyclic flow 
does generate ATP.
Rather than having both PS II and PS I, several of the cur-
rently existing groups of photosynthetic bacteria are known 
to have a single photosystem related to either PS II or PS I. For 
these species, which include the purple sulfur bacteria (see 
Figure 11.2e) and the green sulfur bacteria, cyclic electron 
flow is the one and only means of generating ATP during the 
process of photosynthesis. Evolutionary biologists hypoth-
esize that these bacterial groups are descendants of ancestral 
bacteria in which photosynthesis first evolved, in a form simi-
lar to cyclic electron flow.
Cyclic electron flow can also occur in photosynthetic 
species that possess both photosystems; this includes some 
prokaryotes, such as the cyanobacteria shown in Figure 
11.2d, as well as the eukaryotic photosynthetic species that 
have been tested thus far. Although the process is probably 
in part an “evolutionary leftover,” research suggests it plays 
at least one beneficial role for these organisms. Plants with 
mutations that render them unable to carry out cyclic elec-
tron flow are capable of growing well in low light, but do 
not grow well where light is intense. This is evidence for the 
idea that cyclic electron flow may be photoprotective. Later 
you’ll learn more about cyclic electron flow as it relates to 
a particular adaptation of photosynthesis (C4 plants; see 
Concept 11.5).
Whether ATP synthesis is driven by linear or cyclic elec-
tron flow, the actual mechanism is the same. Before we move 
on to consider the Calvin cycle, let’s review chemiosmosis, 
the process that uses membranes to couple redox reactions to 
ATP production.
ATP
ADP +
H+ 
H+ 
H+ 
Diffusion of 
H+ through 
ATP synthase 
Mitochondrion Chloroplast
Thylakoid
space
Thylakoid
membrane
Stroma
ATP
synthase
Matrix
Pumping 
of H+ 
by ETC
Inner
membrane
Inter-
membrane
space
Pi
Electron
transport
chain (ETC)MITOCHONDRION
STRUCTURE
CHLOROPLAST
STRUCTURE
Higher [H+]
Lower [H+]
Key
c Figure 11.16 Comparison of chemiosmosis 
in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In both 
kinds of organelles, electron transport chains 
pump protons (H+) across a membrane from a 
region of low H+ concentration (light gray in this 
diagram) to one of high H+ concentration (dark 
gray). The protons then diffuse back across the 
membrane through ATP synthase, driving the 
synthesis of ATP.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Describe how you 
would change the pH in order to artificially 
cause ATP synthesis (a) outside an isolated 
mitochondrion (assume H+ can freely cross the 
outer membrane; see Figure 10.14) and (b) in 
the stroma of a chloroplast. Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   271 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 273 ===

272 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
In the mitochondrion, protons diffuse down their con-
centration gradient from the intermembrane space through 
ATP synthase to the matrix, driving ATP synthesis. In the 
chloroplast, ATP is synthesized as the hydrogen ions diffuse 
from the thylakoid space back to the stroma through ATP 
synthase complexes (Figure 11.17), whose catalytic knobs are 
on the stroma side of the membrane. Thus, ATP forms in the 
stroma, where it is used to help drive sugar synthesis during 
the Calvin cycle.
The proton (H+) gradient, or pH gradient, across the thy-
lakoid membrane is substantial. When chloroplasts in an 
chain proteins in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion 
pump protons from the mitochondrial matrix out to the 
intermembrane space, which then serves as a reservoir of 
hydrogen ions. Similarly, electron transport chain proteins 
in the thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast pump protons 
from the stroma into the thylakoid space, which functions as 
the H+ reservoir. If you imagine the cristae of mitochondria 
pinching off from the inner membrane, this may help you see 
how the thylakoid space and the intermembrane space are 
comparable spaces in the two organelles, while the mitochon-
drial matrix is analogous to the stroma of the chloroplast.
H2O
Light
Light
Thylakoid
membrane 4 H+
+ 2 H+ 4 H+
ADP
+
NADP+ + H+
NADP+
reductasePhotosystem ICytochrome
complex
ATP
synthase
Photosystem II
Pq
Fd
Pc
STROMA
Low [H+]
STROMA
Low [H+]
THYLAKOID SPACE
High [H+]
ATP
NADPH
H+
12O2
H2Oe–e–
Pi
NADP+
ADP
[CH2O] (sugar)
LIGHT
REACTIONS
CALVIN
CYCLE
ATP
NADPH
O2
CO2
Light
Thylakoid
Chloroplast
Stroma
CALVIN
CYCLE
1     Energy from light excites an 
electron (e–) from chlorophyll, 
which is transferred to the primary 
electron acceptor in photosystem II.
5     Low-energy e– 
from water end up 
in NADPH (high- 
energy e–). NADPH 
formation removes 
H+ from the stroma, 
decreasing its [H+], 
increasing the pH.
3     Gold arrows track 
the flow of electrons. 
As electrons travel 
down the electron 
transport chain, 4 H+ 
are pumped into the 
thylakoid space, 
increasing [H+], 
decreasing the pH.
     In the thylakoid space, water is split into:
        •2 e–, which replace chlorophyll's             
          electron twice,                         
        •2 H+, which contribute to the                       
          high [H+] in the thylakoid space, and 
        •an O atom, which joins another O,                                          
          forming O2 gas.               
4     In chemiosmosis, the diffusion
of H+ from the thylakoid space
back to the stroma down the [H+] 
gradient powers ATP synthase, 
producing ATP.
2
. Figure 11.17 The light reactions: 
organization of the thylakoid 
membrane.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: The Light Reactions
VISUAL SKILLS Which three steps in the figure contribute to the [H+] gradient across the thylakoid membrane?
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   272 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 274 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 273
Calvin cycle is anabolic, building carbohydrates from smaller 
molecules and consuming energy. Carbon enters the Calvin 
cycle in the form of CO2 and leaves in the form of sugar. The 
cycle spends ATP as an energy source and consumes NADPH 
as reducing power for adding high-energy electrons to make 
the sugar.
As we mentioned in Concept 11.2, the carbohydrate 
produced directly from the Calvin cycle is not glucose. It 
is actually a three-carbon sugar called glyceraldehyde 
3- phosphate (G3P). For the net synthesis of one molecule of 
G3P, the cycle must take place three times, fixing three mol-
ecules of CO2—one per turn of the cycle. (Recall that the term 
carbon fixation refers to the initial incorporation of CO2 into 
organic material.) As we trace the steps of the Calvin cycle, 
keep in mind that we are following three molecules of CO2 
through the reactions. Figure 11.18 divides the Calvin cycle 
into three phases: carbon fixation, reduction, and regenera-
tion of the CO2 acceptor.
Phase 1: Carbon fixation. The Calvin cycle incorpo-
rates each CO2 molecule, one at a time, by attaching it to 
a five-carbon sugar named ribulose bisphosphate (which 
is abbreviated RuBP). The enzyme that catalyzes this first 
step is RuBP carboxylase-oxygenase, or rubisco (see 
Figure 7.32c). (This is the most abundant protein in chlo-
roplasts and is also thought to be the most abundant pro-
tein on Earth.) The product of the reaction is a six-carbon 
intermediate that is short-lived because it is so energeti-
cally unstable that it immediately splits in half, forming 
two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate (for each CO2 fixed).
Phase 2: Reduction. Each molecule of 3- phosphoglycerate  
receives an additional phosphate group from ATP, becom-
ing 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Next, a pair of electrons 
donated from NADPH reduces 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, 
which also loses a phosphate group in the process, be-
coming glyceraldehyde 3- phosphate (G3P). Specifically, 
the electrons from NADPH reduce a carboxyl group on 
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to the aldehyde group of G3P, 
which stores more potential energy. G3P is a sugar—the 
same three-carbon sugar formed in glycolysis by the split-
ting of glucose (see Figure 10.8). Notice in Figure 11.18 that 
for every three molecules of CO2 that enter the cycle, there 
are six molecules of G3P formed. But only one molecule 
of this three-carbon sugar can be counted as a net gain of 
carbohydrate because the rest are required to complete the 
cycle. The cycle began with 15 carbons’ worth of carbo-
hydrate in the form of three molecules of the five-carbon 
sugar RuBP. Now there are 18 carbons’ worth of carbohy-
drate in the form of six molecules of G3P. One molecule 
exits the cycle to be used by the plant cell, but the other 
five molecules must be recycled to regenerate the three 
molecules of RuBP.
experimental setting are illuminated, the pH in the thylakoid 
space drops to about 5 (the H+ concentration increases), and 
the pH in the stroma increases to about 8 (the H+ concentra-
tion decreases). This gradient of three pH units corresponds 
to a thousandfold difference in H+ concentration. If the 
lights are then turned off, the pH gradient is abolished, but 
it can quickly be restored by turning the lights back on. 
Experiments such as this provided strong evidence in support 
of the chemiosmotic model.
The currently accepted model for the organization of the 
light-reaction “machinery” within the thylakoid membrane 
is based on several research studies. Each of the molecules and 
molecular complexes in Figure 11.17 is present in numerous 
copies in each thylakoid. Notice that NADPH, like ATP, is pro-
duced on the side of the membrane facing the stroma, where 
the Calvin cycle reactions take place.
Let’s step back and see the big picture by summarizing the 
light reactions. Electron flow pushes electrons from water, 
where they are at a state of low potential energy, ultimately 
to NADPH, where they are stored at a state of high potential 
energy. The light-driven electron flow also generates ATP. 
Thus, the equipment of the thylakoid membrane converts 
light energy to chemical energy stored in ATP and NADPH. O2 
is produced as a by-product. Let’s now see how the enzymes 
of the Calvin cycle use the products of the light reactions to 
synthesize sugar from CO2.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: The Light Reactions
1. What color of light is least effective in driving 
photosynthesis? Explain.
2. In the light reactions, what is the initial electron donor? 
Where do the electrons finally end up?
3. WHAT IF? In an experiment, isolated chloroplasts placed in 
an illuminated solution with the appropriate chemicals can 
carry out ATP synthesis. Predict what would happen to the 
rate of synthesis if a compound is added to the solution that 
makes membranes freely permeable to hydrogen ions.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 11.3
CONCEPT 11.4
The Calvin cycle uses the 
chemical energy of ATP and 
NADPH to reduce CO2 to sugar
The Calvin cycle takes place in the stroma; it is similar to the 
citric acid cycle in that a starting material is regenerated after 
some molecules enter and others exit the cycle. However, the 
citric acid cycle is catabolic, oxidizing acetyl CoA and using 
the energy to synthesize ATP (see Figure 10.11), while the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   273 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 275 ===

274 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Phase 3: Regeneration of the CO2 acceptor (RuBP). 
In a complex series of reactions, the carbon skeletons of 
five molecules of G3P are rearranged by the last steps of the 
Calvin cycle into three molecules of RuBP. To accomplish 
this, the cycle spends three more molecules of ATP. The 
RuBP is now prepared to receive CO2 again, and the cycle 
continues.
For the net synthesis of one G3P molecule, the Calvin 
cycle consumes a total of nine molecules of ATP and six mol-
ecules of NADPH. The light reactions regenerate the ATP and 
NADPH. The G3P spun off from the Calvin cycle becomes 
the starting material for metabolic pathways that synthesize 
other organic compounds, including glucose (from two mol-
ecules of G3P), sucrose, and other carbohydrates. Neither 
the light reactions nor the Calvin cycle alone can make 
sugar from CO2. Photosynthesis is an emergent property of 
the intact chloroplast, which integrates the two stages of 
photosynthesis.
CONCEPT CHECK 11.4
1. To synthesize one glucose molecule, the Calvin cycle uses 
________ molecules of CO2, ________ molecules of ATP, and 
________ molecules of NADPH.
2. How are the large numbers of ATP and NADPH molecules 
used during the Calvin cycle consistent with the high value 
of glucose as an energy source?
3. WHAT IF? Consider a poison that inhibits an enzyme of the 
Calvin cycle. Do you think such a poison will also inhibit the 
light reactions? Explain.
4. DRAW IT Draw a simple version of the Calvin cycle that 
shows only the number of carbon atoms at each step, using 
numerals rather than gray spheres (for example, “3 * 1C = 3C”  
at the beginning of the cycle). Explain how the total number 
of carbon atoms remains constant for every three turns of 
the cycle, noting the forms in which the carbon atoms enter 
and leave the cycle.
5. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figures 10.8 and 11.18, and 
then discuss the roles of intermediate and product played by 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) in the two processes shown 
in these figures.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Input
3 molecules of CO2 enter one at a time.
Phase 1: Carbon fixation
Output
Calvin
Cycle
3-Phosphoglycerate
6
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
6
6
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
(G3P)
6
1
G3P
G3P
(a sugar)
Glucose and
other organic
compounds
5
Ribulose bisphosphate
(RuBP)
3
ATP
3
3 ADP + 2
6 ADP
ATP
6
6
NADPH
6 NADP+Phase 3: 
Regeneration of
the CO2 acceptor
(RuBP)
Phase 2:
Reduction
Pi
Rubisco
Short-lived
intermediate
3
Light
NADPH
NADP+
ADP
[CH2O] (sugar)
LIGHT
REACTIONS
CALVIN
CYCLE
ATP
O2
CO2
H2O
CCC P
CCC P
P
CCCCC PP
C
CCC P
CCC P
CCCCC PP
CCC P
Pi
C
C
C
m Figure 11.18 The Calvin cycle. This diagram 
summarizes three turns of the cycle, tracking carbon atoms 
(shown as dark-gray spheres). The three phases of the cycle 
correspond to the phases discussed in the text. For every 
three molecules of CO2 that enter the cycle, the net output is 
one molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P), a three-
carbon sugar. The light reactions sustain the Calvin cycle by 
regenerating the required ATP and NADPH.
 Mastering Biology Animation: The Calvin Cycle  
BioFlix® Animation: The Calvin Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   274 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 276 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 275
How can we explain the existence of a metabolic process 
that seems to be counterproductive for the plant? According 
to one hypothesis, photorespiration is evolutionary 
 baggage—a metabolic relic from a much earlier time when 
the atmosphere had less O2 and more CO2 than it does today. 
In the ancient atmosphere that prevailed when rubisco first 
evolved, the ability of the enzyme’s active site to bind O2 
would have made little difference. The hypothesis suggests 
that modern rubisco retains some of its chance affinity for 
O2, which is now so concentrated in the atmosphere that a 
certain amount of photorespiration is inevitable. There is also 
some evidence that photorespiration may provide protection 
against the damaging products of the light reactions, which 
build up when the Calvin cycle slows due to low CO2.
In many types of plants—including a significant number 
of crop plants—photorespiration drains away as much as 50% 
of the carbon fixed by the Calvin cycle. Indeed, if photorespi-
ration could be reduced in certain plant species without oth-
erwise affecting photosynthetic productivity, crop yields and 
food supplies might increase.
In some plant species, alternate modes of carbon fixation 
have evolved that minimize photorespiration and optimize 
the Calvin cycle—even in hot, arid climates. The two most 
important of these photosynthetic adaptations are C4 photo-
synthesis and crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM).
C4 Plants
The C4 plants are so named because they preface the Calvin 
cycle with an alternate mode of carbon fixation that forms a 
four-carbon compound as its first product. The C4 pathway is 
believed to have evolved independently at least 45 separate 
times and is used by several thousand species in at least 19 
plant families. Among the C4 plants important to agriculture 
are sugarcane and corn, members of the grass family.
When the weather is hot and dry, a C4 plant partially closes 
its stomata, conserving water but reducing the CO2 concen-
tration in the leaves. However, sugar is still made because C4 
plants use a multistep process that operates even under low 
CO2 conditions. Photosynthesis begins in mesophyll cells but 
is completed in bundle-sheath cells, cells that are arranged 
into tightly packed sheaths around the veins of the leaf 
(Figure 11.19). In C4 leaves, the loosely arranged mesophyll 
cells are located between the bundle-sheath cells and the 
leaf surface, no more than two to three cells away from the 
 b u n d l e - s h e a t h  c e l l s .  I n  m e s o p h y l l  c e l l s ,  CO2 is incorporated 
into organic compounds that then move into the bundle-
sheath cells, where the Calvin cycle takes place. See the num-
bered steps in Figure 11.19, which are also described here:
1  The first step is carried out by an enzyme present only 
in mesophyll cells called PEP carboxylase, which 
has a much higher affinity for CO2 than does rubisco, 
and no affinity for O2. This enzyme adds CO2 to 
CONCEPT 11.5
Alternative mechanisms of 
carbon fixation have evolved  
in hot, arid climates
EVOLUTION Ever since plants first moved onto land 
about 475 million years ago, they have been adapting to 
the problems of terrestrial life, particularly the problem of 
dehydration. In Concept 36.4, we will consider anatomical 
adaptations that help plants conserve water, while in this 
chapter we are concerned with metabolic adaptations. The 
solutions often involve trade-offs. An important example is 
the balance between photosynthesis and the prevention of 
excessive water loss from the plant. The CO2 required for pho-
tosynthesis enters a leaf (and the resulting O2 exits) via sto-
mata, the pores on the leaf surface (see Figure 11.3). However, 
stomata are also the main avenues of transpiration, the 
evaporative loss of water from leaves. On a hot, dry day, most 
plants close their stomata, a response that conserves water but 
also reduces CO2 levels. With stomata even partially closed, 
CO2 concentrations begin to decrease in the air spaces within 
the leaf, and the concentration of O2 released from the light 
reactions begins to increase. These conditions within the leaf 
favor an apparently wasteful process called photorespiration.
Photorespiration: An Evolutionary Relic?
In most plants, initial fixation of carbon occurs via rubisco, the 
Calvin cycle enzyme that adds CO2 to ribulose bisphosphate. 
Such plants are called C3 plants because the first organic 
product of carbon fixation is a three-carbon compound, 
3- phosphoglycerate (see Figure 11.18). C3 plants include 
important agricultural plants such as rice, wheat, and soybeans. 
When their stomata close on hot, dry days, C3 plants produce 
less sugar because the declining level of CO2 in the leaf starves 
the Calvin cycle. In addition, rubisco is capable of binding O2 
in place of CO2. As CO2 becomes scarce within the air spaces of 
the leaf and O2 builds up, rubisco adds O2 to the Calvin cycle 
instead of CO2. The product splits, and a two-carbon com-
pound leaves the chloroplast. Peroxisomes and mitochondria 
within the plant cell rearrange and split this compound, releas-
ing CO2. The process is called photorespiration because it 
occurs in the light (photo) and consumes O2 while producing 
CO2 (respiration). However, unlike normal cellular respiration, 
photorespiration uses ATP rather than generating it. And unlike 
photosynthesis, photorespiration produces no sugar. In fact, 
photorespiration decreases photosynthetic output by siphon-
ing organic material from the Calvin cycle and releasing CO2 
that would otherwise be fixed. This CO2 can eventually be fixed 
if it is still in the leaf once the CO2 concentration builds up to 
a high enough level. In the meantime, though, the process is 
energetically costly, much like a hamster running on its wheel.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   275 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 277 ===

276 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
intense sunlight, and it is in such environments that  
C4 plants evolved and thrive today.
The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has drasti-
cally increased since the Industrial Revolution began in the 
1800s, and it continues to rise today due to human activi-
ties such as the burning of fossil fuels (see Concept 1.1). The 
resulting global climate change, including an increase in aver-
age temperatures around the planet, may have far-reaching 
effects on plant species. Scientists are concerned that increas-
ing CO2 concentration and temperature may affect C3 and C4 
plants differently, thus changing the relative abundance of 
these species in a given plant community.
Which type of plant would stand to gain more from increas-
ing CO2 levels? Recall that in C3 plants, the binding of O2 rather 
than CO2 by rubisco leads to photorespiration, lowering the 
efficiency of photosynthesis. C4 plants overcome this problem 
by concentrating CO2 in the bundle-sheath cells at the cost of 
ATP. Rising CO2 levels should benefit C3 plants by lowering 
the amount of photorespiration that occurs. At the same time, 
rising temperatures have the opposite effect, increasing photo-
respiration. (Other factors such as water availability may also 
come into play.) In contrast, many C4 plants could be largely 
unaffected by increasing CO2 levels or temperature. Researchers 
have investigated aspects of this question in several studies; you 
can work with data from one such experiment in the Scientific 
Skills Exercise. In different regions, the particular combination 
of CO2 concentration and temperature is likely to alter the bal-
ance of C3 and C4 plants in varying ways. The effects of such a 
widespread and variable change in community structure are 
unpredictable and thus a cause of legitimate concern.
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), forming the four-carbon prod-
uct oxaloacetate; it does this even under conditions of lower 
CO2 concentration and relatively higher O2 concentration.
2  A f t e r  t h e  CO2 is fixed in the mesophyll cells, the four-carbon 
products (malate in the example shown in Figure 11.19) are 
exported to bundle-sheath cells through plasmodesmata 
(see Figure 7.29).
3  W i t h i n  t h e  b u n d l e - s h e a t h  c e l l s ,  a n  e n z y m e  r e l e a s e s  CO2 
from the four-carbon compounds; the CO2 is re-fixed into 
organic material by rubisco and the Calvin cycle. The same 
reaction regenerates pyruvate, which is transported to 
mesophyll cells. There, ATP is used to convert pyruvate to 
PEP, which can then accept addition of another CO2,  
allowing the reaction cycle to continue. This ATP can be 
thought of, in a sense, as the “price” of concentrating CO2 
in the bundle-sheath cells. To generate this extra ATP, 
 b u n d l e - s h e a t h  c e l l s  c a r r y  o u t  c y c l i c  e l e c t r o n  f l o w ,  t h e  p r o-
cess described earlier in this chapter (see Figure 11.15). In 
fact, these cells contain PS I but no PS II, so cyclic electron 
flow is their only photosynthetic mode of generating ATP.
In effect, the mesophyll cells of a C4 plant pump CO2 into 
the bundle-sheath cells, keeping the CO2 concentration in 
those cells high enough for rubisco to bind CO2 rather than 
O2. The cyclic series of reactions involving PEP carboxylase 
and the regeneration of PEP can be thought of as an ATP-
powered pump that concentrates CO2 where it can be fixed. 
In this way, C4 photosynthesis spends ATP energy to mini-
mize photorespiration and enhance sugar production. This 
adaptation is especially advantageous in hot regions with 
Mesophyll
cell PEP carboxylase
Oxaloacetate (4C)
Stoma
Plasmodesma
PEP (3C)
CO2
Malate (4C)
Pyruvate (3C)
Calvin
Cycle
Sugar
Vascular
tissue
Bundle-
sheath
cell
The C4 pathway
C4 leaf anatomy
CO2
ADP
Photosynthetic
cells of C4 plant
leaf
Mesophyll cell
Bundle-
sheath
cell
Vein
(vascular tissue) ATP
     In mesophyll cells,
the enzyme PEP
carboxylase adds CO2 
to PEP, forming a four- 
carbon compound.
1
     The four-carbon
compound (such as 
malate) moves into 
a bundle-sheath cell
via plasmodesmata.
2
     In bundle-sheath
cells, an enzyme 
releases CO2, which
enters the Calvin 
cycle.
3
m Figure 11.19 C4 leaf anatomy and the C4 pathway. The 
structure and biochemical functions of the leaves of C4 plants are 
an evolutionary adaptation to hot, dry climates. This adaptation 
maintains a CO2 concentration in the bundle-sheath cells that 
favors photosynthesis over photorespiration.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   276 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 278 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 277
that the yield of C4 rice might be 30–50% higher than C3 rice 
with the same input of water and resources.
CAM Plants
A second photosynthetic adaptation to arid conditions has 
evolved in pineapples, many cacti, and other succulent 
(water-storing) plants, such as aloe and jade plants. These 
plants open their stomata at night and close them during the 
day, just the reverse of how other plants behave. Closing sto-
mata during the day helps desert plants conserve water, but it 
C4 photosynthesis is considered more efficient than C3 
photosynthesis because it uses less water and resources. On our 
planet today, the world population and demand for food are 
rapidly increasing. At the same time, the amount of land suit-
able for growing crops is decreasing due to the effects of global 
climate change, which include an increase in sea level as well 
as a hotter, drier climate in many regions. To address issues of 
food supply, scientists in the Philippines have been working 
on genetically modifying rice—an important food staple that 
is a C3 crop—so that it can instead carry out C4 photosynthesis. 
Results so far seem promising, and these researchers estimate 
Making Scatter Plots with  
Regression Lines
Does Atmospheric CO2 Concentration Affect the Productivity 
of Agricultural Crops? The atmospheric concentration of CO2 
has been rising globally, and scientists wondered whether this 
would affect C3 and C4 plants differently. In this exercise, you will 
make a scatter plot to examine the relationship between CO2 
concentration and growth of both corn (maize), a C4 crop plant, 
and velvetleaf, a C3 weed found in cornfields.
How the Experiment Was Done For 45 days, researchers grew 
corn and velvetleaf plants under controlled conditions, where all 
plants received the same amounts of water and light. The plants were 
divided into three groups, and each was exposed to a different con-
centration of CO2 in the air: 350, 600, or 1,000 ppm (parts per million).
Data from the Experiment The table shows the dry mass (in 
grams) of corn and velvetleaf plants grown at the three concen-
trations of CO2. The dry mass values are averages calculated from 
the leaves, stems, and roots of eight plants.
350 ppm  
CO2
600 ppm  
CO2
1,000 ppm 
CO2
Average dry mass of 
one corn plant (g)
91 89 80
Average dry mass of 
one velvetleaf plant (g)
35 48 54
Data from D. T. Patterson and E. P. Flint, Potential effects of global atmospheric 
CO2 enrichment on the growth and competitiveness of C3 and C4 weed and crop 
plants, Weed Science 28(1):71–75 (1980).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. To explore the relationship between the two variables, it is 
useful to graph the data in a scatter plot, and then draw a 
regression line. (a) First, place labels for the dependent and 
independent variables on the appropriate axes. Explain your 
choices. (b) Plot the data points for corn and velvetleaf using 
different symbols for each set of data, and add a key for the 
two symbols. (For additional information about graphs, see 
the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
2. Draw a “best-fit” line for each set of points. A best-fit line does 
not necessarily pass through all or even most points. Instead, 
it is a straight line that passes as close as possible to all data 
points from that set. Draw a best-fit line for each set of data. 
Because placement of the line is a matter of judgment, two 
individuals may 
draw two slightly 
different lines for a 
given set of points. 
The line that actu-
ally fits best, a re-
gression line, can be 
identified by squar-
ing the distances 
of all points to any 
candidate line, 
then selecting the 
line that minimizes 
the sum of the squares. (See the graph in the Scientific Skills 
Exercise in Chapter 3 for an example of a linear regression 
line.) Excel or other software programs, including those on a 
graphing calculator, can plot a regression line once data points 
are entered. Using either Excel or a graphing calculator, enter 
the data points for each data set and have the program draw 
the two regression lines. Compare them to the lines you drew.
3. Describe the trends shown by the regression lines in your scatter 
plot. (a) Compare the relationship between increasing concen-
tration of CO2 and the dry mass of corn to that for velvetleaf. 
(b) Considering that velvetleaf is a weed invasive to cornfields, 
predict how increased CO2 concentration may affect interactions 
between the two species.
4. Based on the data in the scatter plot, estimate the percentage 
change in dry mass of corn and velvetleaf plants if atmospheric 
CO2 concentration increased from 390 ppm (current levels) 
to 800 ppm. (a) What is the estimated dry mass of corn and 
velvetleaf plants at 390 ppm? 800 ppm? (b) To calculate the 
percentage change in mass for each plant, subtract the mass at 
390 ppm from the mass at 800 ppm (change in mass), divide by 
the mass at 390 ppm (initial mass), and multiply by 100. What is 
the estimated percentage change in dry mass for corn? For vel-
vetleaf? (c) Do these results support the conclusion from other 
experiments that C3 plants grow better than C4 plants under in-
creased CO2 concentration? Why or why not?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
 
 
Corn
Velvetleaf
c Corn plant 
surrounded by 
invasive velvetleaf 
plants.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   277 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 279 ===

278 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
1. Describe how photorespiration lowers photosynthetic 
 output for plants.
2. The presence of only PS I, not PS II, in the bundle-sheath 
cells of C4 plants has an effect on O2 concentration. What is 
that effect, and how might that benefit the plant?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Refer to the discussion of ocean 
acidification in Concept 3.3. Ocean acidification and 
changes in the distribution of C3 and C4 plants may seem to 
be two very different problems, but what do they have in 
common? Explain.
4. WHAT IF? A CAM plant is placed in a controlled environment, 
where the plant is grown in the constant presence of light. 
How would this continuous exposure to light affect the plant?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
also prevents CO2 from entering the leaves. During the night, 
when their stomata are open, these plants take up CO2 and 
incorporate it into a variety of organic acids. This mode of 
carbon fixation is called crassulacean acid metabolism, 
or CAM, after the plant family Crassulaceae, the succulents 
in which the process was first discovered. The mesophyll cells 
of CAM plants store the organic acids they make during 
the night in their vacuoles until morning, when the stomata 
close. During the day, when the light reactions can supply 
ATP and NADPH for the Calvin cycle, CO2 is released from 
the organic acids made the night before to become incorpo-
rated into sugar in the chloroplasts.
Notice in Figure 11.20 that the CAM pathway is similar to 
the C4 pathway in that CO2 is first incorporated into organic 
intermediates before it enters the Calvin cycle. The differ-
ence is that in C4 plants, the initial steps of carbon fixation 
are separated structurally from the Calvin cycle, whereas in 
CAM plants, the two steps occur within the same cell but at 
separate times. (Keep in mind that CAM, C4, and C3 plants 
all eventually use the Calvin cycle to make sugar from car-
bon dioxide.)
Sugar
CO2
CO2
Calvin
Cycle
Calvin
Cycle
Sugar
CO2
Organic acid
CO2
Bundle-
sheath
cell
Mesophyll
cell
C4 CAM
Day
NightOrganic acid
Sugarcane Pineapple
(a)Spatial separation of steps.
In C4 plants, carbon fixation 
and the Calvin cycle occur in
different types of cells.
(b)Temporal separation of steps.
In CAM plants, carbon fixation
and the Calvin cycle occur in 
the same cell at different times.
11
22
. Figure 11.20 C4 and CAM photosynthesis compared. The C4 
and CAM pathways are two evolutionary solutions to the problem 
of maintaining photosynthesis with stomata partially or completely 
closed on hot, dry days. Both adaptations are characterized by: 
1 preliminary incorporation of CO2 into organic acids, followed by 
2 transfer of CO2 to the Calvin cycle.
CONCEPT CHECK 11.5
CONCEPT 11.6
Photosynthesis is essential for life 
on Earth: a review
In this chapter, we have followed photosynthesis from pho-
tons to food. The light reactions capture solar energy and use 
it to make ATP and transfer electrons from H2O to NADP+, 
forming NADPH. The Calvin cycle uses the ATP and NADPH 
to produce sugar from CO2. The energy that enters the chlo-
roplasts as sunlight becomes stored as chemical energy in 
organic compounds. The entire process is reviewed visu-
ally in Figure 11.21, where photosynthesis is also put in its 
 natural context.
As for the fates of photosynthetic products, enzymes in 
the chloroplast and cytosol convert the G3P made in the 
Calvin cycle to many other organic compounds. In fact, the 
sugar made in the chloroplasts supplies the entire plant with 
chemical energy and carbon skeletons for the synthesis of all 
the major organic molecules of plant cells. About 50% of the 
organic material made by photosynthesis is consumed as fuel 
for cellular respiration in plant cell mitochondria.
Technically, green cells are the only autotrophic parts of 
the plant. The rest of the plant depends on organic molecules 
exported from leaves through veins (see Figure 11.21, top). In 
most plants, carbohydrate is transported out of the leaves to the 
rest of the plant in the form of sucrose, a disaccharide. After arriv-
ing at nonphotosynthetic cells, the sucrose provides raw mate-
rial for cellular respiration and a multitude of anabolic pathways 
that synthesize proteins, lipids, and other products. A consider-
able amount of sugar in the form of glucose is linked together to 
make the polysaccharide cellulose (see Figure 5.6c), especially 
in plant cells that are still growing and maturing. Cellulose, the 
main ingredient of cell walls, is the most abundant organic mol-
ecule in the plant—and probably on the surface of the planet.
Most plants and other photosynthesizers make more 
organic material per day than they need to use as respiratory 
 Mastering Biology B i o F l i x® Animation: Photosynthesis 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Photosynthesis in Dry Climates 
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   278 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 280 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 279
reach 17 times the distance from Earth to the sun! No chemi-
cal process is more important than photosynthesis to the 
welfare of life on Earth.
In Chapters 5 through 8 and 10 and 11, you have learned 
about many activities of cells. Figure 11.22 integrates these 
cellular processes into the context of a working plant cell. As 
you study the figure, reflect on how each process fits into the 
big picture: As the most basic unit of living organisms, a cell 
performs all functions characteristic of life.
fuel and precursors for biosynthesis. For example, flowering 
plants stockpile the extra sugar in the form of starch, storing 
some in the chloroplasts and some in cells of roots, tubers, 
seeds, and fruits. In accounting for the use of food molecules 
produced by photosynthesis, note that most flowering plants 
lose leaves, roots, stems, fruits, and often their entire bodies 
to heterotrophs, including humans.
On a global scale, photosynthesis is the process respon-
sible for the presence of O2 in our atmosphere. Furthermore, 
although each chloroplast is minuscule, their collective 
productivity in terms of food production is enormous: 
Photosynthesis makes an estimated 150 billion metric tons  
of carbohydrate per year (a metric ton is 1,000 kg, about  
1.1 tons). That’s organic matter equivalent in mass to a stack 
of about 60 trillion biology textbooks—and the stack would 
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: Photosynthesis 
MP3 Tutor: Photosynthesis
• Take place in the stroma
• Use ATP and NADPH to convert
   CO2 to the sugar G3P
• Return ADP , inorganic phosphate,
   and NADP+ to the light reactions
Starch
(storage)
Mesophyll cell
Chloroplast
O2
CALVIN
CYCLE
H2O
Sucrose (export)
Light
LIGHT
REACTIONS:
Photosystem II
Electron transport chain
Photosystem I
Electron transport chain
RuBP
3-Phosphoglycerate
G3P
NADPH
NADP+
ADP
+
Pi
ATP
CO2
• Are carried out by molecules
   in the thylakoid membranes
• Convert light energy to the chemical
   energy of ATP and NADPH
• Split H2O and release O2
CO2
Sucrose
(export)
H2O
O2
LIGHT REACTIONS CALVIN CYCLE REACTIONS
H2O
. Figure 11.21 A review of photosynthesis. This diagram shows 
the main reactants and products of photosynthesis as they move 
through the tissues of a tree (left) and a chloroplast (right).
CONCEPT CHECK 11.6
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS How do plants use the sugar they 
produce during photosynthesis to directly power the work 
of the cell? Provide some examples of cellular work. (See 
Figures 6.10, 6.11, and 10.5.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   279 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 281 ===

1
2
3
4
5
6
Golgi
apparatus
Vesicle
forming
Protein
Plasma
membrane
Cell wall
Protein
in vesicle
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
DNA
mRNA
Nuclear
pore
Nucleus
Cytosol
Ribosome
mRNA
Protein
1
2
3
4
5
6
Flow of Genetic Information in the Cell:
DNA RNA Protein (Chapters 5, 7, 8)
6Jis Ƃgure illustrates JoY a generali\ed plant cell 
functions, integrating the cellular activities you 
learned about in Chapters 5 through 8 and 10 and 11. To see some of the 
en\[Oes inXolXed looM at (igure 
In the nucleus, DNA serves as a template for the 
synthesis of mRNA, which moves to the 
cytoplasm. (See Figures 5.22 and 7.9.)
mRNA attaches to a ribosome, which remains free 
in the cytosol or binds to the rough ER. Proteins are 
synthesized. (See Figures 5.22 and 7.10.)
Proteins and membrane produced by the rough 
ER ﬂow in vesicles to the Golgi apparatus, where 
they are processed. (See Figures 7.15 and 8.9.)
Transport vesicles carrying proteins pinch off 
from the Golgi apparatus. (See Figure 7.15.)
Some vesicles merge with the plasma membrane, 
releasing proteins by exocytosis. (See Figure 8.9.)
Proteins synthesized on free ribosomes stay in 
the cell and perform speciﬁc functions; examples 
include the enzymes that catalyze the reactions 
of cellular respiration and photosynthesis. (See 
Figures 10.6, 10.8, and 11.18.)
The Working Cell
. Figure 11.22
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
280 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   280 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 282 ===

Vacuole
Photosynthesis
in chloroplast
Organic
molecules
Aquaporin
CO2
CO2
H2O
O2
O2
H2O
Transport
pumpCellular respiration
in mitochondrion
10
11
7
9
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP
8
 
Energy Transformations in the Cell:
Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
(Chapters 6, 10, 11)  
Movement Across Cell Membranes
(Chapter 8)
10
11
Water diffuses into and out of the cell 
directly through the plasma membrane and 
by facilitated diffusion through aquaporins. 
(See Figure 8.10.)
By passive transport, the CO2 used in 
photosynthesis diffuses into the cell,
and the O2 formed as a by-product of 
photosynthesis diffuses out of the cell. Both 
solutes move down their concentration 
gradients. (See Figures 8.11 and 11.21.)
Exocytosis (shown in step 5) and endocytosis 
move larger materials out of and into the cell. 
(See Figures 8.20 and 8.21.)
In active transport, energy (usually supplied 
by ATP) is used to transport a solute against its 
concentration gradient. (See Figure 8.17.)
 In chloroplasts, the process of photosynthesis uses the 
energy of light to convert CO2 and H2O to organic molecules, 
with O2 as a by-product. (See Figures 11.1 and 11.21.)
In mitochondria, organic molecules are broken down by 
cellular respiration, capturing energy in molecules of ATP, 
which are used to power the work of the cell, such as 
protein synthesis and active transport. CO2 and H2O are 
by-products. (See Figures 6.9, 6.11, 10.1, and 10.15.)
8
7
9
  Mastering Biology  
BioFlix® Animation: Tour of an Animal Cell 
BioFlix® Animation: Tour of a Plant Cell
 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 281
The first enzyme that functions in glycolysis is hexokinase (see 
Figure 7.32a). How is hexokinase produced in this plant cell? 
Specify the locations of each step of the process. Where does 
hexokinase function? (See Figures 5.18, 5.22, and 10.8.)
MAKE CONNECTIONS
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   281 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 283 ===

282 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
11 Chapter Review
Photosynthesis feeds the biosphere (p. 260)
• Photosynthesis converts the energy of sunlight into chemical 
energy stored in sugars.
• Autotrophs (“producers”) produce their organic molecules from 
CO2 and other inorganic raw materials; plants are photoautotrophs 
that use light energy to do this. Heterotrophs (consumers, 
 including decomposers) are unable to make their own food and 
live on compounds produced by others.
? Using the terms producers, consumers, and decomposers, explain 
how photosynthesis feeds organisms, either directly or indirectly.
Photosystem II
Photosystem IATP
Pq
Primary
electron
acceptor
Pc
Cytochrome
complex
Primary
electron
acceptor
Electron transport
chain
O2
H2O
Fd
NADP+
reductase
NADP+
+ H+
NADPH
Electron transport
chain
• Cyclic electron flow employs only one photosystem, produc-
ing ATP but no NADPH or O2.
• During chemiosmosis in both mitochondria and chloroplasts, 
electron transport chains generate an H+ gradient across a mem-
brane. ATP synthase uses this proton-motive force to make ATP .
? The absorption spectrum of chlorophyll a differs from the action 
spectrum of photosynthesis. Explain this observation.
CONCEPT 11.1
CONCEPT 11.2
Photosynthesis converts light energy to the chemical 
energy of food (pp. 261–264)
• In plants and other eukaryotic autotrophs, photosynthesis occurs 
in chloroplasts, organelles containing thylakoids. Stacks of 
thylakoids form grana. Photosynthesis is summarized as
 6 CO2+12 H2O +Light energy S C6H12O6+6 O2+6 H2O.
 Chloroplasts split water into hydrogen and oxygen, incorporating the 
electrons of hydrogen into sugar molecules. Photosynthesis is a redox 
process: H2O is oxidized, and CO2 is reduced. The light reactions 
in the thylakoid membranes split water, releasing O2, producing ATP , 
and forming NADPH. The Calvin cycle in the stroma forms sugar 
from CO2, using ATP for energy and NADPH for reducing power.
? Compare the roles of CO2 and H2O in cellular respiration and 
photosynthesis.
CONCEPT 11.3
The light reactions convert solar energy to the 
chemical energy of ATP and NADPH (pp. 264–273)
• Light is a form of electromagnetic energy. The colors we see 
as visible light include those wavelengths that drive pho-
tosynthesis. A pigment absorbs light of specific wavelengths; 
chlorophyll a is the main photosynthetic pigment in plants. 
Other accessory pigments absorb different wavelengths of light 
and pass the energy on to chlorophyll a.
• A pigment goes from a ground state to an excited state when 
a photon of light boosts one of the pigment’s electrons to a 
higher-energy orbital. This excited state is unstable. Electrons 
from isolated pigments tend to fall back to the ground state, giv-
ing off heat and/or light.
• A photosystem is composed of a reaction-center complex 
surrounded by light-harvesting complexes that funnel the 
energy of photons to the reaction-center complex. When a special 
pair of reaction-center chlorophyll a molecules absorbs energy, 
one of its electrons is boosted to a higher energy level and trans-
ferred to the primary electron acceptor . Photosystem II  
contains P680 chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction-center 
complex; photosystem I contains P700 molecules.
• Linear electron flow during the light reactions uses both pho-
tosystems and produces NADPH, ATP , and oxygen:
CONCEPT 11.4
The Calvin cycle uses the chemical energy of ATP  
and NADPH to reduce CO2 to sugar (pp. 273–274)
• The Calvin cycle 
occurs in the stroma, 
using electrons from 
NADPH and energy 
from ATP . 
• One molecule of 
G3P exits the cycle 
per three CO2 mol-
ecules fixed and is 
converted to glucose 
and other organic 
molecules.
DRAW IT On the diagram above, draw where ATP and NADPH are used 
and where rubisco functions. Describe these steps.
Calvin
Cycle
Carbon fixation
Regeneration of
CO2 acceptor
Reduction
3 x 5C 6 x 3C
5 x 3C
1 G3P (3C)
3 CO2
Alternative mechanisms of carbon fixation have 
evolved in hot, arid climates (pp. 275–278)
• On dry, hot days, C3 plants close their stomata, conserving 
water but keeping CO2 out and O2 in. Under these conditions, 
photorespiration can occur: Rubisco binds O2 instead of CO2,  
consuming ATP and releasing CO2 without producing ATP or car-
bohydrate. Photorespiration may be an evolutionary relic, and it 
may play a photoprotective role.
• C4 and CAM plants are adopted to hot, dry climates.
CONCEPT 11.5
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   282 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 284 ===

 CHAPTER 11  Photosynthetic Processes 283
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT The following diagram 
represents an experiment with isolated thylakoids. The 
thylakoids were first made acidic by soaking them in a solution 
at pH 4. After the thylakoid space reached pH 4, the thylakoids 
were transferred to a basic solution at pH 8. The thylakoids then 
made ATP in the dark. (See Concept 3.3 to review pH.)
pH 7
pH 4
pH 4
pH 8
ATP
Draw an enlargement of part of the thylakoid membrane in 
the beaker with the solution at pH 8. Draw ATP synthase. Label 
the areas of high H+ concentration and low H+ concentration. 
Show the direction protons flow through the enzyme, and 
show the reaction where ATP is synthesized. Would ATP end up 
in the thylakoid or outside of it? Explain why the thylakoids in 
the experiment were able to make ATP in the dark.
11. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ENERGY AND MATTER In a short 
essay (100–150 words), describe how photosynthesis transforms 
solar energy into the chemical energy of sugar molecules.
12. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
“W atermelon snow” in Antarctica 
is caused by a certain species of 
photosynthetic green algae that 
thrives in subzero temperatures 
(Chlamydomonas nivalis). These 
algae are also found in high-altitude, 
year-round snowfields. In both 
locations, UV light levels tend to be 
high. Propose an explanation for 
why this alga appears reddish-pink.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 11.6
Photosynthesis is essential for life on Earth: a review 
(pp. 278–281)
• Organic compounds produced by photosynthesis provide the 
 energy and building material for Earth’s ecosystems.
? How do plants use the products of photosynthesis?
• C4 plants minimize the cost of photorespiration by incorporat-
ing CO2 into four-carbon compounds in mesophyll cells. These 
compounds are exported to bundle-sheath cells, where they 
release carbon dioxide for use in the Calvin cycle.
• CAM plants open their stomata at night, incorporating CO2 into 
organic acids, which are stored in mesophyll cells. During the day, 
the stomata close, and the CO2 is released from the organic acids 
for use in the Calvin cycle.
• Organic compounds produced by photosynthesis provide the 
 energy and building material for Earth’s ecosystems.
? Why are C4 and CAM photosynthesis more energetically expensive 
than C3 photosynthesis? What climate conditions would favor C4 and 
CAM plants?
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
Can we capture the sun’s energy by mimicking plants?  
Go to “Replicating Photosynthesis”  
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
8. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY Scientific 
evidence indicates that the CO2 added to the air by the 
burning of wood and fossil fuels is contributing to global 
warming, a rise in global temperature. Tropical rain forests 
are estimated to be responsible for approximately 20% 
of global photosynthesis, yet the consumption of large 
amounts of CO2 by living trees is thought to make little or 
no net contribution to reduction of global warming. Explain 
why this might be the case. (Hint: What processes in both 
living and dead trees produce CO2?)
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Photorespiration can decrease 
soybeans’ photosynthetic output by about 50%. Would this 
figure be higher or lower in wild relatives of soybeans? Why?
URRY1637_12_GE_C11_PRF.indd   283 3/21/20   1:03 AM

=== SIDE 285 ===

Two cells Four cells
Figure 12.1 A multicellular organism starts out as a single cell that divides into two. 
Those two cells then divide into four, as shown in these fluorescence micrographs 
of a marine worm embryo. Cell division continues throughout an organism’s life, for 
growth or to replace worn-out or damaged cells. Each time a cell divides in this way, 
it is crucial that the daughter cells be genetically identical to the parent cell.
Mitosis12
How does one parent cell give rise to 
two genetically identical daughter cells?
The daughter cells 
may go on to divide, 
repeating the cycle.
Interphase: The cell grows; in 
preparation for cell division, the 
chromosomes are duplicated, with the 
genetic material (DNA) copied precisely.
Mitosis: The chromosome copies are 
separated from each other and moved 
to opposite ends of the cell.
Cytokinesis: The cell divides 
into two daughter cells, 
genetically identical to each 
other and to the parent cell.
Daughter cells
Parent cell
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 12
• BioFlix® Animation: Mitosis
• Animation: Microtubule 
Depolymerization
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Mitosis (2 of 3): 
Mechanisms of Mitosis
• Coaching Activity: Evaluating Science in 
the Media: Tanning and Skin Cancer
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• Mitosis (Concept 12.2)
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Figure 12.1  
presents the events of the cell cycle 
as a simplified linear diagram. As you 
learn more about the cell cycle, draw a 
detailed linear diagram of the stages 
of interphase, mitosis, and cytokinesis. 
Include explanatory labels. Add the 
circular chart from Figure 12.6 and 
show how the two diagrams are 
related.
12.1 Most cell division results in 
genetically identical daughter  
cells p. 285
12.2 The mitotic phase alternates with 
interphase in the cell cycle p. 287
12.3 The eukaryotic cell cycle is 
regulated by a molecular control 
system p. 294
KEY CONCEPTS
Interphase
G1 phase: Metabolic
activity and growth
The Cell Cycle
284
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   284 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 286 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 285
material—DNA—to two daughter cells. (The exception is 
meiosis, the special type of eukaryotic cell division that can 
produce sperm and eggs.) What is most remarkable about cell 
division is the accuracy with which the DNA is passed from 
one generation of cells to the next. A dividing cell replicates 
its DNA, distributes the two copies to opposite ends of the 
cell, and then splits into daughter cells.
Cellular Organization of the  
Genetic Material
A cell’s DNA, its genetic information, is called its genome. 
Although a prokaryotic genome is often a single DNA mole-
cule, eukaryotic genomes usually consist of a number of DNA 
molecules. The overall length of DNA in a eukaryotic cell is 
enormous. A typical human cell, for example, has about 2 m 
of DNA—a length about 250,000 times greater than the cell’s 
diameter. Before the cell can divide to form genetically iden-
tical daughter cells, all of this DNA must be copied, or repli-
cated, and then the two copies must be separated so that each 
daughter cell ends up with a complete genome.
The replication and distribution of so much DNA are man-
ageable because the DNA molecules are packaged into struc-
tures called chromosomes (from the Greek chroma, color, 
and soma, body), so named because they take up certain dyes 
used in microscopy (Figure 12.3). Each eukaryotic chromo-
some consists of one very long, linear DNA molecule associ-
ated with many proteins (see Figure 7.9). The DNA molecule 
carries several hundred to a few thousand genes, the units of 
information that specify an organism’s inherited traits. The 
associated proteins maintain the structure of the chromo-
some and help control the activity of the genes. Together, 
the entire complex of DNA and proteins that is the building 
material of chromosomes is referred to as chromatin. As you 
will soon see, the chromatin of a chromosome varies in its 
degree of condensation during the process of cell division.
CONCEPT 12.1
Most cell division results in 
genetically identical daughter cells
The ability of organisms to produce more of their own kind 
is the one characteristic that best distinguishes living things 
from nonliving matter. This unique capacity to procreate, like 
all biological functions, has a cellular basis. The continuity of 
life is based on the reproduction of cells, or cell division.
Key Roles of Cell Division
Cell division plays several important roles in life. When a 
prokaryotic cell divides, it is actually reproducing because the 
process gives rise to a new organism (another cell). The same is 
true of any unicellular eukaryote, such as the amoeba shown 
in Figure 12.2a. As for multicellular eukaryotes, cell division 
enables each of these organisms to develop from a single cell—
the fertilized egg. A two-celled embryo, the first stage in this 
process, is shown in Figure 12.2b. And cell division continues 
to function in renewal and repair in fully grown multicellular 
eukaryotes, replacing cells that die from accidents or normal 
wear and tear. For example, dividing cells in your bone mar-
row continuously make new blood cells (Figure 12.2c).
The reproduction of a cell, with all of its complex-
ity, cannot occur by a mere pinching in half; a cell is not 
like a soap bubble that simply enlarges and splits in two. 
In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, a crucial function of 
most cell divisions is the distribution of identical genetic 
100 om
50 om
20 om
b (c)Tissue renewal. These 
dividing bone marrow cells 
will give rise to new blood 
cells (LM).
b (a)
(b) Growth and develop-
ment. This micrograph 
shows a sand dollar 
embryo shortly after the 
fertilized egg divided, 
forming two cells (LM).
c
Asexual reproduction.    
An amoeba, a single-celled 
eukaryote, is dividing into 
two cells. Each new cell 
will be an individual 
organism (LM).
. Figure 12.2 The functions of cell division.
 Mastering Biology Video: Cell Division in a Sea Urchin Embryo
 20 om
. Figure 12.3 Eukaryotic chromosomes. Chromosomes 
(stained purple) are visible within the nucleus of this cell from 
an African blood lily. The thinner red threads in the surrounding 
cytoplasm are the cytoskeleton. The cell is preparing to divide (LM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   285 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 287 ===

286 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Every eukaryotic species has a characteristic number 
of chromosomes in each cell’s nucleus. For example, the 
nuclei of human somatic cells (all body cells except the 
reproductive cells) each contain 46 chromosomes, made 
up of two sets of 23, one set inherited from each parent. 
Reproductive cells, or gametes—such as sperm and eggs—
have half as many chromosomes as somatic cells; in our 
example, human gametes have one set of 23 chromosomes. 
The number of chromosomes in somatic cells varies widely 
among species: 18 in cabbage plants, 48 in chimpanzees, 56 
in elephants, 90 in hedgehogs, and 148 in one species of alga. 
We’ll now consider how these chromosomes behave during 
cell division.
Distribution of Chromosomes  
During Eukaryotic Cell Division
When a cell is not dividing, and even as it replicates its DNA 
in preparation for cell division, each chromosome is in the 
form of a long, thin chromatin fiber. After DNA replication, 
however, the chromosomes condense as a part of cell divi-
sion: Each chromatin fiber becomes 
densely coiled and folded, making the 
chromosomes much shorter and so 
thick that we can see them with a light 
microscope.
Each duplicated chromosome consists 
of two sister chromatids, which are 
joined copies of the original chromo-
some (Figure 12.4). The two chromatids, 
each containing an identical DNA mol-
ecule, are often attached all along their 
lengths by protein complexes called 
cohesins; this attachment is known as 
sister chromatid cohesion. Each sister 
chromatid has a centromere, a region 
made up of repetitive sequences in the 
chromosomal DNA where the chromatid 
is attached most closely to its sister chro-
matid. This attachment is mediated by 
proteins that recognize and bind to the 
centromeric DNA; other bound proteins 
condense the DNA, giving the dupli-
cated chromosome a narrow “waist.” 
The portion of a chromatid to either side 
of the centromere is referred to as an 
arm of the chromatid. (An unduplicated 
chromosome has a single centromere, 
distinguished by the proteins that bind 
there, and two arms.)
Later in the cell division process, the 
two sister chromatids of each duplicated 
chromosome separate and move into two 
new nuclei, one forming at each end of 
Sister 
chromatids
Centromeres, one on
each sister chromatid 0.5 om
. Figure 12.4 A highly condensed, duplicated human 
chromosome. (SEM)
DRAW IT Circle one sister chromatid of this chromosome.
Chromosome duplication
(including DNA replication)
and condensation 
Chromosome 
arm
Centromere
Chromosomes
Chromosomal
DNA molecules
Sister
chromatids
Separation of sister
chromatids into
two chromosomes
One of the multiple chromosomes 
in a eukaryotic cell is represented 
here, not yet duplicated. At this 
stage, it is a long, thin chromatin 
fiber containing one DNA molecule 
and associated proteins. (For 
simplicity, the chromosome is 
shown in condensed form, and the 
nuclear envelope is not shown.)
1
Once duplicated, a chromosome 
consists of two sister chroma-
tids connected along their entire 
lengths by sister chromatid 
cohesion. Each chromatid contains 
a copy of the DNA molecule.
2
Molecular and mechanical 
processes separate the sister 
chromatids into two chromosomes 
and distribute them to two 
daughter cells.
3
. Figure 12.5 Chromosome duplication and distribution during cell division.
? How many chromatid arms does the chromosome in 2 have?  
Identify the point in the figure where one chromosome becomes two.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Chromosome Duplication
the cell. Once the sister chromatids separate, they are no longer 
called sister chromatids but are considered individual chro-
mosomes; this is the step that essentially doubles the number 
of chromosomes during cell division. Thus, each new nucleus 
receives a collection of chromosomes identical to that of the 
parent cell (Figure 12.5). Mitosis, the division of the genetic 
material in the nucleus, is usually followed immediately by 
cytokinesis, the division of the cytoplasm. One cell has 
become two, each the genetic equivalent of the parent cell.
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   286 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 288 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 287
The G phases were misnamed as “gaps” when they were 
first observed because the cells appeared inactive, but we 
now know that intense metabolic activity and growth occur 
throughout interphase. During all three phases of interphase, 
actually, a cell grows by producing proteins and cytoplasmic 
organelles such as mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. 
Duplication of the chromosomes, crucial for eventual division 
of the cell, occurs entirely during the S phase. (We’ll explore 
synthesis, or replication, of DNA in Concept 16.2.) Thus, a cell 
grows (G1), continues to grow as it copies its chromosomes (S), 
grows more as it completes preparations for cell division (G2), 
and divides (M). The daughter cells may then repeat the cycle.
A particular human cell might undergo one division in  
24 hours. Of this time, the M phase would occupy less than  
1 hour, while the S phase might occupy 10–12 hours, or about 
half the cycle. The rest of the time would be apportioned 
between the G1 and G2 phases. The G2 phase usually takes  
4–6 hours; in our example, G1 would occupy about 5–6 hours. 
G1 is the most variable in length in different types of cells. 
Some cells in a multicellular organism divide very infre-
quently or not at all. These cells spend their time in G1 (or 
a related phase called G0, to be discussed later in the chap-
ter) doing their job in the organism—a cell of the pancreas 
secretes digestive enzymes, for example.
Mitosis is conventionally broken down into five stages: 
prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, 
and telophase. Overlapping with the latter stages of mito-
sis, cytokinesis completes the mitotic phase. Figure 12.7 
describes these stages in an animal cell. Study this figure 
thoroughly before proceeding to the next two sections, which 
examine mitosis and cytokinesis more closely.
From a fertilized egg, mitosis and cytokinesis produced the 
37 trillion somatic cells that now make up your body, and the 
same processes continue to generate new cells to replace dead 
and damaged ones. In contrast, you produce gametes—eggs 
or sperm—by a variation of cell division called meiosis, which 
yields daughter cells with only one set of chromosomes, half 
as many chromosomes as the parent cell. Meiosis in humans 
occurs only in special cells in the ovaries or testes (the gonads). 
Generating gametes, meiosis reduces the chromosome num-
ber from 46 (two sets) to 23 (one set). Fertilization fuses two 
gametes together and returns the chromosome number to 46 
(two sets). Mitosis then conserves that number in every somatic 
cell nucleus of the new human individual. In Chapter 13,  
we will examine the role of meiosis in reproduction and inher-
itance in more detail. In the remainder of this chapter, we 
focus on mitosis and the rest of the cell cycle in eukaryotes.
CONCEPT CHECK 12.1
1. How many chromosomes are drawn in each part of  
Figure 12.5? (Ignore the micrograph in step 2.)
2. WHAT IF? A mother kangaroo has 16 chromosomes in its 
somatic cells. How many chromosomes will be in a fertilized 
egg of the kangaroo? How many chromosomes will it pass on 
to its offspring? How many chromosomes will the offspring 
inherit from the father kangaroo?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 12.2
The mitotic phase alternates with 
interphase in the cell cycle
In 1882, a German anatomist named Walther Flemming 
developed dyes that allowed him to observe, for the first time, 
the behavior of chromosomes during mitosis and cytokinesis. 
(In fact, Flemming coined the terms mitosis and chromatin.) 
During the period between one cell division and the next, 
it appeared to Flemming that the cell was simply growing 
larger. But we now know that many critical events occur dur-
ing this stage in the life of a cell.
Phases of the Cell Cycle
Mitosis is just one part of the cell cycle, the life of a cell 
from the time it is first formed during division of a parent cell 
until its own division into two daughter cells (Figure 12.6). 
(Biologists use the words daughter or sister in relation to cells, 
but this is not meant to imply gender.) In fact, the mitotic 
(M) phase, which includes both mitosis and cytokinesis, is 
usually the shortest part of the cell cycle. The mitotic phase 
alternates with a much longer stage called interphase, 
which often accounts for about 90% of the cycle. Interphase 
can be divided into three phases: the G1 phase (“first gap”), 
the S phase (“synthesis”), and the G2 phase (“second gap”). 
CytokinesisMitosis
G1 phase: Metabolic
activity and growth
       G2 phase:
     Metabolic activity,
  growth, and preparation
for cell division
S phase: Metabolic
activity, growth, and
DNA synthesis
MITOTIC      
INTERPHASE 
 (M) PHASE 
Duplicated
chromosomes
Unduplicated
chromosomes
MITOTIC (M) PHASE:
Mitosis: Distribution of chromosomes into two daughter nuclei
Cytokinesis: Division of cytoplasm, producing two daughter
cells. Each daughter cell can start a new cell cycle.
. Figure 12.6 The cell cycle. In a dividing cell, the mitotic (M) 
phase alternates with interphase, a growth period.
 Mastering Biology Animation: The Cell Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   287 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 289 ===

288 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
/uni25BC Figure 12.7  Exploring Mitosis in an Animal Cell
? How many molecules of DNA are in the 
prometaphase drawing? How many molecules per 
chromosome? How many double helices are there 
per chromosome? Per chromatid?
Centrosomes
(with centriole pairs)
Early mitotic
spindle
Fragments 
of nuclear 
envelope
Centromere Nonkinetochore
microtubules
Kinetochore
microtubules
KinetochoreNucleolus Nuclear
envelope
Plasma
membrane
G2 of Interphase
Two sister chromatids
of one chromosome
Aster
Chromosomes
(duplicated, 
uncondensed)
G2 of Interphase Prophase Prometaphase
•  A nuclear envelope encloses the nucleus.
•  The nucleus contains one or more nucleoli  
 ( s i n g u l a r ,  nucleolus).
•  Two centrosomes have formed by   
 d u p l i c a t i o n  o f  a  s i n g l e  c e n t r o s o m e .    
 C e n t r o s o m e s  a r e  r e g i o n s  i n  a n i m a l  c e l l s   
 t h a t  o r g a n i z e  t h e  m i c r o t u b u l e s  o f  t h e   
 s p i n d l e .  E a c h  c e n t r o s o m e  c o n t a i n s  t w o   
 c e n t r i o l e s .
• Chromosomes, duplicated during S phase,  
 c a n n o t  b e  s e e n  i n d i v i d u a l l y  b e c a u s e  t h e y   
 h a v e  n o t  y e t  c o n d e n s e d .
Prophase
• The chromatin fibers become more tightly   
 coiled, condensing into discrete chromosomes 
 o b s e r v a b l e  w i t h  a  l i g h t  m i c r o s c o p e .
• The nucleoli disappear.
• Each duplicated chromosome appears as two  
 i d e n t i c a l  s i s t e r  c h r o m a t i d s  j o i n e d  a t  t h e i r  c e n -  
 t r o m e r e s  a n d ,  o f t e n ,  a l l  a l o n g  t h e i r  a r m s  b y
     cohesins, resulting in sister chromatid
     cohesion.
• The mitotic spindle (named for its shape)   
 b e g i n s  t o  f o r m .  I t  i s  c o m p o s e d  o f  t h e  c e n t r o -
 s o m e s  a n d  t h e  m i c r o t u b u l e s  t h a t  e x t e n d  f r o m   
 them. The radial arrays of shorter microtubules  
 t h a t  e x t e n d  f r o m  t h e  c e n t r o s o m e s  a r e  c a l l e d    
 a s t e r s  ( “ s t a r s ” ) .
• The centrosomes move away from each other, 
 p r o p e l l e d  p a r t l y  b y  t h e  l e n g t h e n i n g  m i c r o -       
 t u b u l e s  b e t w e e n  t h e m .
Prometaphase
• The nuclear envelope fragments.
• The microtubules extending from each centro-     
some can now invade the nuclear!area.
• The chromosomes have become even more 
condensed.
• A kinetochore, a specialized protein structure, 
has now formed at the centromere of each 
chromatid (thus, two per chromosome).
• Some of the microtubules attach to the kineto-  
chores, becoming “kinetochore microtubules,” 
which jerk the chromosomes back and forth.
• Nonkinetochore microtubules interact with 
those from the opposite pole of the!spindle, 
lengthening the cell.
The fluorescence micrographs show dividing 
lung cells from a newt; this species has 22 
chromosomes. Chromosomes appear blue, 
microtubules green, and intermediate 
filaments red. For simplicity, the drawings 
show only 6 chromosomes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   288 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 290 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 289
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Mitosis 
Video: Animal Mitosis (time-lapse)
Daughter
chromosomes
Metaphase
plate
Spindle
Nucleolus
forming
Nuclear
envelope 
forming
Cleavage
furrow
Centrosome at 
one spindle pole
10 om
Metaphase Anaphase Telophase and Cytokinesis
Metaphase
• The centrosomes are now at opposite poles of   
 t h e  c e l l .
• The chromosomes have all arrived at the   
 metaphase plate, a plane that is equidistant  
 b e t w e e n  t h e  s p i n d l e ’ s  t w o  p o l e s .  T h e  c h r o m o -    
 s o m e s ’  c e n t r o m e r e s  l i e  a t  t h e  m e t a p h a s e  p l a t e .
• For each chromosome, the kinetochores of the   
 s i s t e r  c h r o m a t i d s  a r e  a t t a c h e d  t o  k i n e t o c h o r e    
 m i c r o t u b u l e s  c o m i n g  f r o m  o p p o s i t e  p o l e s .
Anaphase
• Anaphase is the shortest stage of mitosis, often   
 l a s t i n g  o n l y  a  f e w  m i n u t e s .
• Anaphase begins when the cohesin proteins are   
 cleaved. This allows the two sister chromatids    
 o f  e a c h  p a i r  t o  p a r t ! s u d d e n l y .  E a c h  c h r o m a t i d    
 t h u s  b e c o m e s  a n  i n d e p e n d e n t  c h r o m o s o m e .
• The two new daughter chromosomes begin    
 m o v i n g  t o w a r d  o p p o s i t e  e n d s  o f  t h e  c e l l    
 a s  t h e i r  k i n e t o c h o r e  m i c r o t u b u l e s  s h o r t e n .    
 B e c a u s e  t h e s e  m i c r o t u b u l e s  a r e  a t t a c h e d  a t  t h e    
 c e n t r o m e r e  r e g i o n ,  t h e  c e n t r o m e r e s  a r e  p u l l e d      
 ahead of the arms, moving at a rate of about              
 1  om/min.          
• The cell elongates as the nonkinetochore   
 m i c r o t u b u l e s  l e n g t h e n .
• By the end of anaphase, the two ends of 
 t h e  c e l l  h a v e  i d e n t i c a l — a n d  c o m p l e t e —    
 c o l l e c t i o n s  o f  c h r o m o s o m e s .
Telophase
Cytokinesis
• Two daughter nuclei form in the cell.   
 N u c l e a r  e n v e l o p e s  a r i s e  f r o m  t h e  f r a g m e n t s   
 o f  t h e  p a r e n t  c e l l ’ s  n u c l e a r  e n v e l o p e  a n d   
 o t h e r  p o r t i o n s  o f  t h e  e n d o m e m b r a n e   
 s y s t e m .
• Nucleoli reappear.
• The chromosomes become less condensed.
• Any remaining spindle microtubules are  
 d e p o l y m e r i z e d .
• M i t o s i s ,  t h e  d i v i s i o n  o f  o n e  n u c l e u s  i n t o   
 t w o  g e n e t i c a l l y  i d e n t i c a l  n u c l e i ,  i s  n o w   
 c o m p l e t e .
• The division of the cytoplasm is usually well  
 u n d e r  w a y  b y  l a t e  t e l o p h a s e ,  s o  t h e  t w o   
 d a u g h t e r  c e l l s  a p p e a r  s h o r t l y  a f t e r  t h e  e n d   
 o f  m i t o s i s .
• In animal cells, cytokinesis involves the  
 f o r m a t i o n  o f  a  c l e a v a g e  f u r r o w ,  w h i c h   
 p i n c h e s  t h e  c e l l  i n  t w o .
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   289 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 291 ===

290 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
the asters have also grown and are in contact with the plasma 
membrane. The spindle is now complete.
The structure of the spindle correlates well with its func-
tion during anaphase. Anaphase begins suddenly when the 
cohesins holding together the sister chromatids of each chro-
mosome are cleaved by an enzyme called separase. Once sepa-
rated, the chromatids become individual chromosomes that 
move toward opposite ends of the cell.
The Mitotic Spindle: A Closer Look
Many of the events of mitosis depend on the mitotic 
spindle, which begins to form in the cytoplasm during pro-
phase. This structure consists of fibers made of microtubules 
and associated proteins. While the mitotic spindle assembles, 
the other microtubules of the cytoskeleton partially disassem-
ble, providing the material used to construct the spindle. The 
spindle microtubules elongate (polymerize) by incorporat-
ing more subunits of the protein tubulin (see Table 7.1) and 
shorten (depolymerize) by losing subunits.
In animal cells, the assembly of spindle microtubules starts 
at the centrosome, a subcellular region containing material 
that functions throughout the cell cycle to organize the cell’s 
microtubules. (It is also a type of microtubule-organizing center.) 
A pair of centrioles is located at the center of the centrosome, 
but they are not essential for cell division: If the centrioles 
are destroyed with a laser microbeam, a spindle nevertheless 
forms during mitosis. In fact, centrioles are not even present 
in plant cells, which do form mitotic spindles.
During interphase in animal cells, the single centrosome 
duplicates, forming two centrosomes, which remain near the 
nucleus. The two centrosomes move apart during prophase 
and prometaphase of mitosis as spindle microtubules grow 
out from them. By the end of prometaphase, the two centro-
somes, one at each pole of the spindle, are at opposite ends of 
the cell. An aster, a radial array of short microtubules, extends 
from each centrosome. The spindle includes the centrosomes, 
the spindle microtubules, and the asters.
Each of the two sister chromatids of a duplicated chromo-
some has a kinetochore, a structure made up of proteins that 
have assembled on specific sections of DNA at each centro-
mere. The chromosome’s two kinetochores face in opposite 
directions. During prometaphase, some of the spindle micro-
tubules attach to the kinetochores; these are called kinetochore 
microtubules. (The number of microtubules attached to a 
kinetochore varies among species, from one microtubule in 
yeast cells to 40 or so in some mammalian cells.) When one of 
a chromosome’s kinetochores is “captured” by microtubules, 
the chromosome begins to move toward the pole from which 
those microtubules extend. However, this movement comes 
to a halt as soon as microtubules from the opposite pole attach 
to the kinetochore on the other chromatid. What happens 
next is like a tug-of-war that ends in a draw. The chromosome 
moves first in one direction and then in the other, back and 
forth, finally settling midway between the two ends of the cell. 
At metaphase, the centromeres of all the duplicated chromo-
somes are on a plane midway between the spindle’s two poles. 
This plane is called the metaphase plate, which is an imagi-
nary plate rather than an actual cellular structure (Figure 12.8).  
Meanwhile, microtubules that do not attach to kinetochores 
have been elongating, and by metaphase they overlap and 
interact with other nonkinetochore microtubules from the oppo-
site pole of the spindle. By metaphase, the microtubules of 
DRAW IT On the lower micrograph, draw a line indicating the 
position of the metaphase plate. Draw arrows showing the directions of 
chromosome movement when anaphase begins.
 Mastering Biology Video: Spindle Formation During Mitosis 
Animation: Mitosis
Sister
chromatids
Aster
Centrosome
Metaphase
plate 
(imaginary)
Kineto-
chores
Kinetochore
microtubules
Overlapping
nonkinetochore
microtubules
0.5 om
Chromosomes
5 om
Kinetochores
Microtubules
. Figure 12.8 The mitotic spindle at metaphase. The 
kinetochores of each chromosome’s two sister chromatids face in 
opposite directions. Here, each kinetochore is attached to a cluster 
of kinetochore microtubules (see TEM) extending from the nearest 
centrosome. Nonkinetochore microtubules overlap at the metaphase 
plate. The fluorescent micrograph is a rat kangaroo cell at metaphase.
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   290 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 292 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 291
How do the kinetochore microtubules function in this 
poleward movement of chromosomes? Apparently, two 
mechanisms are in play, both involving motor proteins. (To 
review how motor proteins move an object along a microtu-
bule, see Figure 7.21.) Results of a cleverly designed experi-
ment suggested that motor proteins on the kinetochores 
“walk” the chromosomes along the microtubules, which 
depolymerize at their kinetochore ends after the motor pro-
teins have passed (Figure 12.9). (This is referred to as the “Pac-
man” mechanism because of its resemblance to the arcade 
game character that moves by eating all the dots in its path.) 
However, other researchers, working with different cell types 
or cells from other species, have shown that chromosomes 
are “reeled in” by motor proteins at the spindle poles and that 
the microtubules depolymerize after they pass by these motor 
proteins at the poles. The general consensus now is that both 
mechanisms are used and that their relative contributions 
vary among cell types.
In a dividing animal cell, the nonkinetochore microtubules 
are responsible for elongating the whole cell during anaphase. 
Nonkinetochore microtubules from opposite poles overlap each 
other extensively during metaphase (see Figure 12.8). During 
anaphase, the region of overlap is reduced as motor proteins 
attached to the microtubules walk them away from one another, 
using energy from ATP. As the microtubules push apart from 
each other, their spindle poles are pushed apart, elongating the 
cell. At the same time, the microtubules lengthen somewhat by 
the addition of tubulin subunits to their overlapping ends. As a 
result, the microtubules continue to overlap.
At the end of anaphase, duplicate groups of chromosomes 
have arrived at opposite ends of the elongated parent cell. 
Nuclei re-form during telophase. Cytokinesis generally begins 
during anaphase or telophase, and the spindle eventually dis-
assembles by depolymerization of microtubules.
Cytokinesis: A Closer Look
In animal cells, cytokinesis occurs by a process known as 
cleavage. The first sign of cleavage is the appearance of a 
cleavage furrow, a shallow groove in the cell surface near 
the old metaphase plate (Figure 12.10a). On the cytoplasmic 
side of the furrow is a contractile ring of actin microfilaments 
associated with molecules of the protein myosin. The actin 
microfilaments interact with the myosin molecules, causing 
the ring to contract. The contraction of the dividing cell’s 
ring of microfilaments is like the pulling of a drawstring. The 
cleavage furrow deepens until the parent cell is pinched in 
two, producing two completely separated cells, each with its 
own nucleus and its own share of cytosol, organelles, and 
other subcellular structures.
Cytokinesis in plant cells, which have cell walls, is markedly 
different. There is no cleavage furrow. Instead, during telo-
phase, vesicles derived from the Golgi apparatus move along 
microtubules to the middle of the cell, where they coalesce, 
producing a cell plate. Cell wall materials carried in the 
Experiment Gary Borisy and colleagues at the University of 
Wisconsin wanted to determine whether kinetochore micro-
tubules depolymerize at the kinetochore end or the pole end 
as chromosomes move toward the poles during mitosis. First 
they labeled the microtubules of a pig kidney cell in early 
anaphase with a yellow fluorescent dye. (Nonkinetochore mi-
crotubules are not shown.)
Kinetochore
Spindle
pole
Then they marked a region of the kinetochore microtubules 
between one spindle pole and the chromosomes by using a laser 
to eliminate the fluorescence from that region, while leaving the 
microtubules intact (see below). As anaphase proceeded, they 
monitored the changes in microtubule length on either side of 
the non-fluorescent mark.
Mark
Results A s  t h e  c h r o m o s o m e s  m o v e d  p o l e w a r d ,  t h e  m i c r o t u-
bule segments on the kinetochore side of the mark shortened, 
while those on the spindle pole side stayed the same length.
Conclusion During anaphase in this cell type, chromosome 
movement is correlated with kinetochore microtubules shorten-
ing at their kinetochore ends and not at their spindle pole ends. 
This experiment supports the hypothesis that during anaphase, 
a chromosome is walked along a microtubule as the microtubule 
depolymerizes at its kinetochore end, releasing tubulin subunits.
Chromosome
movement
Kinetochore
Tubulin
subunits
Chromosome
Motor
proteinMicrotubule
Data from G. J. Gorbsky, P. J. Sammak, and G. G. Borisy, Chromosomes move 
poleward in anaphase along stationary microtubules that coordinately disas-
semble from their kinetochore ends, Journal of Cell Biology 104:9–18 (1987).
WHAT IF? If this experiment had been done on a cell type in which 
“reeling in” at the poles was the main cause of chromosome movement, 
how would the mark have moved relative to the poles? How would the 
microtubule portions on either side of the mark have changed?
At which end do kinetochore microtubules 
shorten during anaphase?
. Figure 12.9 Inquiry
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  M i c r o t u b u l e  D e p o l y m e r i z a t i o n
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   291 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 293 ===

292 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
vesicles collect inside the cell plate as it grows (Figure 12.10b).  
The cell plate enlarges until its surrounding membrane fuses 
with the plasma membrane along the perimeter of the cell. 
Two daughter cells result, each with its own plasma mem-
brane. Meanwhile, a new cell wall arising from the contents of 
the cell plate forms between the daughter cells.
Figure 12.11 is a series of micrographs of a dividing plant 
cell. Examining this figure will help you review mitosis and 
cytokinesis.
Binary Fission in Bacteria
Prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) can undergo a type of 
reproduction in which the cell grows to roughly double its size 
and then divides to form two cells. The term binary fission, 
meaning “division in half,” refers to this process and to the 
asexual reproduction of single-celled eukaryotes, such as the 
amoeba in Figure 12.2a. However, the process in eukaryotes 
involves mitosis, while that in prokaryotes does not.
In bacteria, most genes are carried on a single bacterial chro-
mosome that consists of a circular DNA molecule and associ-
ated proteins. Although bacteria are smaller and simpler than 
eukaryotic cells, the challenge of replicating their genomes in 
an orderly fashion and distributing the copies equally to two 
daughter cells is still formidable. For example, when it is fully 
stretched out, the chromosome of the bacterium Escherichia coli 
is about 500 times as long as the cell. For such a long chromo-
some to fit within the cell, it must be highly coiled and folded.
In some bacteria, the process of cell division is initiated 
when the DNA of the bacterial chromosome begins to repli-
cate at a specific place on the chromosome called the origin 
of replication, producing two origins. As the chromosome 
continues to replicate, one origin moves rapidly toward the 
opposite end of the cell (Figure 12.12). While the chromo-
some is replicating, the cell elongates. When replication 
is complete and the bacterium has reached about twice its 
initial size, proteins cause its plasma membrane to pinch 
inward, dividing the parent bacterial cell into two daughter 
cells. In this way, each cell inherits a complete genome.
Using the techniques of modern DNA technology to tag the 
origins of replication with molecules that glow green in fluo-
rescence microscopy (see Figure 7.3), researchers have directly 
observed the movement of bacterial chromosomes. This 
movement is reminiscent of the poleward movements of the 
centromere regions of eukaryotic chromosomes during ana-
phase of mitosis, but bacteria don’t have visible mitotic spin-
dles or even microtubules. In most bacterial species studied, 
the two origins of replication end up at opposite ends of the 
cell or in some other very specific location, possibly anchored 
there by one or more proteins. How bacterial chromosomes 
move and how their specific location is established and main-
tained are active areas of research. Several proteins that play 
important roles have been identified. Polymerization of one 
protein resembling eukaryotic actin apparently functions 
Daughter cells
Cleavage furrow
Contractile ring of microfilaments
Daughter cells
Cell plate
Wall of
parent cell
Vesicles
forming
cell plate New cell wall
100 om
1 om
(a) Cleavage of an animal cell (SEM)
(b) Cell plate formation in a plant cell (TEM)
. Figure 12.10 Cytokinesis in animal and plant cells.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cytokinesis  
Video: Cytokinesis in an Animal Cell
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   292 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 294 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 293
Nucleus Chromosomes
condensing ChromosomesNucleolus
Prophase. The chromo-
somes are condensing 
and the nucleolus is 
beginning to disappear. 
Although not yet visible 
in the micrograph, the 
mitotic spindle is starting 
to form.
Prometaphase. Discrete 
chromosomes are now 
visible; each consists of 
two aligned, identical 
sister chromatids. Later 
in prometaphase, the 
nuclear envelope will 
fragment.
Anaphase. Chromatids 
of each chromosome 
have separated. The 
daughter chromosomes 
are moving to the ends
of the cell as their 
kinetochore micro-
tubules shorten.
Telophase. Daughter 
nuclei are forming. 
Cytokinesis has started: 
The cell plate, which 
will divide the cytoplasm 
in two, grows toward 
the perimeter of the 
parent cell.
Metaphase. The spindle 
is complete, and the 
chromosomes, attached 
to microtubules at their 
kinetochores, are all at 
the metaphase plate.
10 omCell plate
1 2 3 4 5
. Figure 12.11 Mitosis in a plant cell. These light micrographs show mitosis in cells of an onion root.
Chromosome
replication begins at
the origin. Soon after, 
one copy of the origin
moves rapidly toward the
other end of the cell by
a mechanism involving 
an actin-like protein.
1
Replication continues.
One copy of the origin
is now at each end of
the cell. Meanwhile,
the cell elongates.
2
Replication finishes.
The plasma membrane
is pinched inward by
a tubulin-like protein, 
and a new cell wall is
deposited.
3
Two daughter
cells result.
4
Origin of
replication
Bacterial cell Bacterial
chromosome
Plasma 
membrane
Cell wall
Two copies
of origin
Origin Origin
. Figure 12.12 Bacterial cell division by binary fission. The 
bacterium E. coli, shown here, has a single, circular chromosome.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cell Division in Bacteria
in bacterial chromosome movement during cell division, 
and another protein that is related to tubulin helps pinch 
the plasma membrane inward, separating the two bacterial 
daughter cells.
The Evolution of Mitosis
EVOLUTION Given that prokaryotes preceded eukaryotes 
on Earth by more than a billion years, we might hypothesize 
that mitosis evolved from simpler prokaryotic mechanisms of 
cell reproduction. The fact that some of the proteins involved 
in bacterial binary fission are related to eukaryotic proteins 
that function in mitosis supports that hypothesis.
As eukaryotes with nuclear envelopes and larger genomes 
evolved, the ancestral process of binary fission, seen today 
in bacteria, somehow gave rise to mitosis. Variations on cell 
division exist in different groups of organisms. These variant 
processes may be similar to mechanisms used by ancestral 
species and thus may resemble steps in the evolution of mito-
sis from a binary fission-like process presumably carried out 
by very early bacteria. Possible intermediate stages are sug-
gested by two unusual types of nuclear division found today 
in certain unicellular eukaryotes—dinoflagellates, diatoms, 
and some yeasts (Figure 12.13). These two modes of nuclear 
division are thought to be cases where ancestral mechanisms 
have remained relatively unchanged over evolutionary time. 
In both types, the nuclear envelope remains intact, in con-
trast to what happens in most eukaryotic cells. Keep in mind, 
however, that we can’t observe cell division in cells of extinct 
species. This hypothesis uses only currently existing species as 
some possible examples of intermediate mechanisms. Other 
mechanisms may have existed in species that have gone 
extinct; we simply have no way of knowing.
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   293 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 295 ===

294 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Bacteria. During binary fission in bacteria, the origins of the 
daughter chromosomes move to opposite ends of the cell. The 
mechanism involves polymerization of actin-like molecules and 
possibly proteins that may anchor the daughter chromosomes to 
specific sites on the plasma membrane.
(a)
Diatoms and some yeasts. In these two other groups of 
unicellular eukaryotes, the nuclear envelope also remains intact 
during cell division. In these organisms, the microtubules form a 
spindle within the nucleus. Microtubules separate the 
chromosomes, and the nucleus splits into two daughter nuclei.
(c)
Most eukaryotes. In most other eukaryotes, including plants and 
animals, the spindle forms outside the nucleus, and the nuclear 
envelope breaks down during mitosis. Microtubules separate the 
chromosomes, and two nuclear envelopes then form.
(d)
Microtubules
Chromosomes
Kinetochore 
microtubule
Fragments of
nuclear envelope
Kinetochore 
microtubule
Intact nuclear
envelope
Intact nuclear 
envelope
Bacterial
chromosome
Dinoflagellates. In unicellular eukaryotes called dinoflagellates, 
the chromosomes attach to the nuclear envelope, which remains 
intact during cell division. Microtubules pass through the nucleus 
inside cytoplasmic tunnels, reinforcing the spatial orientation of 
the nucleus, which then divides in a process reminiscent of 
bacterial binary fission.
(b)
. Figure 12.13 Mechanisms of cell division in several groups 
of organisms. Some unicellular eukaryotes existing today have 
mechanisms of cell division that may resemble intermediate steps in 
the evolution of mitosis. Except for (a), cell walls are not shown.
 Mastering Biology Video: Nuclear Envelope Breakdown and 
Formation During Mitosis in C. elegans, a Eukaryote
CONCEPT CHECK 12.2
1. How many chromosomes are shown in the illustration in 
Figure 12.8? Are they duplicated? How many chromatids are 
shown?
2. Compare cytokinesis in animal cells and plant cells.
3. During which stage of the cell cycle does each of the sister 
chromatids become an independent chromosome?
4. Compare the roles of tubulin and actin during eukaryotic 
cell division with the roles of tubulin-like and actin-like pro-
teins during bacterial binary fission.
5. A kinetochore has been compared to a coupling device that 
connects a motor to the cargo that it moves. Explain.
6. MAKE CONNECTIONS What other functions do actin and 
tubulin carry out? Name the proteins they interact with to do 
so. (Review Figures 7.21a and 7.26a.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
The eukaryotic cell cycle is 
regulated by a molecular  
control system
The timing and rate of cell division in different parts of a 
plant or animal are crucial to normal growth, development, 
and maintenance. The frequency of cell division varies with 
the type of cell. For example, human skin cells divide fre-
quently throughout life, whereas liver cells maintain the 
ability to divide but keep it in reserve until an appropriate 
need arises—say, to repair a wound. Some of the most special-
ized cells, such as fully formed nerve cells and muscle cells, 
do not divide at all in a mature human. These cell cycle dif-
ferences result from regulation at the molecular level. The 
mechanisms of this regulation are of great interest, not only 
to understand the life cycles of normal cells but also to learn 
how cancer cells manage to escape the usual controls.
The Cell Cycle Control System
What controls the cell cycle? In the early 1970s, a variety of 
experiments led to the hypothesis that the cell cycle is driven 
by specific signaling molecules present in the cytoplasm. Some 
of the first strong evidence for this hypothesis came from 
experiments with mammalian cells grown in culture. In these 
experiments, two cells in different phases of the cell cycle were 
fused to form a single cell with two nuclei (Figure 12.14). If one 
of the original cells was in the S phase and the other was in G1,  
the G1 nucleus immediately entered the S phase, as though 
stimulated by signaling molecules present in the cytoplasm of 
the first cell. Similarly, if a cell undergoing mitosis (M phase) 
was fused with another cell in any stage of its cell cycle, even 
G1, the second nucleus immediately entered mitosis, with con-
densation of the chromatin and formation of a mitotic spindle.
The experiment shown in Figure 12.14 and other experi-
ments on animal cells and yeasts demonstrated that the 
CONCEPT 12.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   294 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 296 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 295
control system (the molecular basis for the cell cycle clock) 
and describe how a cell progresses through the cycle. We’ll 
then consider the internal and external checkpoint signals 
that can make the clock either pause or continue.
The Cell Cycle Clock: Cyclins and  
Cyclin-Dependent Kinases
Rhythmic fluctuations in the abundance and activity of cell 
cycle control molecules pace the sequential events of the  
cell cycle. These regulatory molecules are mainly proteins of 
two types: protein kinases and cyclins. As you learned in  
Concept 9.3, protein kinases are enzymes that activate or 
inactivate other proteins by phosphorylating them.
Many of the kinases that drive the cell cycle are actually 
present at a constant concentration in the growing cell, but 
much of the time they are in an inactive form. To be active, 
such a kinase must be attached to a cyclin, a protein that 
gets its name from its cyclically fluctuating concentration in 
the cell. Because of this requirement, these kinases are called 
cyclin-dependent kinases, or Cdks. The activity of a Cdk 
rises and falls with changes in the concentration of its cyclin 
partner. Figure 12.16a shows the fluctuating activity of MPF, 
the cyclin-Cdk complex that was discovered first (in frog 
eggs). Note that the peaks of MPF activity correspond to the 
peaks of cyclin concentration. The cyclin level rises during 
the S and G2 phases and then falls abruptly during M phase.
The initials MPF stand for “maturation-promoting fac-
tor,” but we can think of MPF as “M-phase-promoting factor” 
because it triggers the cell’s passage into the M phase, past 
the G2 checkpoint. When cyclins that accumulate during G2 
associate with Cdk molecules, the resulting MPF complex 
Experiment Researchers at the University of Colorado 
wondered whether a cell’s progression through the cell cycle 
is controlled by cytoplasmic molecules. They induced cul-
tured mammalian cells at different phases of the cell cycle to 
fuse. Two experiments are shown.
Results
When a cell in S phase 
was fused with a cell in 
G1, the G1 nucleus 
immediately entered 
S phase—DNA was 
synthesized.
When a cell in M phase was 
fused with a cell in G1, the G1 
nucleus immediately began 
mitosis—a spindle formed and 
the chromosomes condensed, 
even though the chromosomes 
had not been duplicated. 
SS MM
S
Fusion
Duplicated
chromosomes
Fusion
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
G1 MG 1
Conclusion T h e  r e s u l t s  o f  f u s i n g  a  G1 cell with a cell in the 
S or M phase of the cell cycle suggest that molecules present 
in the cytoplasm during the S or M phase control the pro-
gression to those phases.
Data from R. T. Johnson and P. N. Rao, Mammalian cell fusion: Induction of prema-
ture chromosome condensation in interphase nuclei, Nature 226:717–722 (1970).
WHAT IF? If the progression of phases did not depend on 
cytoplasmic molecules and each phase began when the previous one 
was complete, how would the results have differed?
Do molecular signals in the cytoplasm regulate 
the cell cycle?
. Figure 12.14 Inquiry
sequential events of the cell cycle are directed by a distinct cell 
cycle control system, a cyclically operating set of molecules 
in the cell that both triggers and coordinates key events in the 
cell cycle (Figure 12.15). The cell cycle control system has been 
compared to the control device of a washing machine. Like the 
washer’s timing device, the cell cycle control system proceeds on 
its own, according to a built-in clock. However, just as a washer’s 
cycle is subject to both internal control (such as the sensor that 
detects when the tub is filled with water) and external adjust-
ment (such as starting or stopping the machine), the cell cycle is 
regulated at certain checkpoints by both internal and external 
signals. A checkpoint in the cell cycle is a control point where 
stop and go-ahead signals can regulate the cycle. Three impor-
tant checkpoints are found in the G1, G2, and M phases (red 
gates in Figure 12.15), which will be discussed shortly.
To understand how cell cycle checkpoints work, we’ll first 
identify some of the molecules that make up the cell cycle 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Control of the Cell Cycle
G1 checkpoint
M checkpoint
G2 checkpoint
G1
G2M
S
Control
system
. Figure 12.15 Mechanical analogy for the cell cycle control 
system. In this diagram, the flat “stepping stones” around the 
perimeter represent sequential events. Like the control device of a 
washing machine, the cell cycle control system proceeds on its own, 
driven by a built-in clock. However, the system is subject to internal 
and external regulation at various checkpoints; three important 
checkpoints are shown (red).
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   295 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 297 ===

296 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
lamina (see Figure 7.9), which promotes fragmentation of 
the nuclear envelope during prometaphase of mitosis. There 
is also evidence that MPF contributes to molecular events 
required for chromosome condensation and spindle forma-
tion during prophase.
During anaphase, MPF helps switch itself off by initiating 
a process that leads to the destruction of its own cyclin. The 
noncyclin part of MPF, the Cdk, persists in the cell, inactive 
until it becomes part of MPF again by associating with new 
cyclin molecules synthesized during the S and G2 phases of 
the next round of the cycle.
The fluctuating activities of different cyclin-Cdk com-
plexes are of major importance in controlling all the stages 
of the cell cycle; they also give the go-ahead signals at some 
checkpoints. As mentioned above, MPF controls the cell’s 
passage through the G2 checkpoint. Cell behavior at the G1 
checkpoint is also regulated by the activity of cyclin-Cdk 
protein complexes. Animal cells appear to have at least three 
Cdk proteins and several different cyclins that operate at this 
checkpoint. Next, let’s consider checkpoints in more detail.
Stop and Go Signs: Internal and External Signals at 
the Checkpoints
Animal cells generally have built-in stop signals that halt the 
cell cycle at checkpoints until overridden by go-ahead signals. 
Many signals registered at checkpoints come from cellular 
surveillance mechanisms inside the cell. These signals report 
whether crucial cellular processes that should have occurred 
by that point have in fact been completed correctly and thus 
whether or not the cell cycle should proceed. Checkpoints 
also register signals from outside the cell. The signals are 
transmitted within the cell by signal transduction pathways 
(see Figure 9.6). Three important checkpoints are those in the 
G1, G2, and M phases (see Figure 12.15).
For many cells, the G1 checkpoint seems to be the most 
important. If a cell receives a go-ahead signal at the G1 check-
point, it will usually complete the G1, S, G2, and M phases and 
divide. If it does not receive a go-ahead signal at that point, it 
may exit the cycle, switching into a nondividing state called 
the G0 phase (Figure 12.17a). Most cells of the human body 
are actually in the G0 phase. As mentioned earlier, mature nerve 
cells and muscle cells never divide. Other cells, such as liver 
cells, can be “called back” from the G0 phase to the cell cycle by 
external cues, such as growth factors released during injury.
Biologists are currently working out the pathways that 
link signals originating inside and outside the cell with the 
responses by cyclin-dependent kinases and other proteins. An 
example of an internal signal occurs at the third important 
checkpoint, the M checkpoint (Figure 12.17b). Anaphase, 
the separation of sister chromatids, does not begin until all 
the chromosomes are properly attached to the spindle at the 
metaphase plate. Researchers have learned that as long as some 
kinetochores are unattached to spindle microtubules, the sister 
chromatids remain together, delaying anaphase. Only when 
is active—it phosphorylates a variety of proteins, initiating 
mitosis (Figure 12.16b). MPF acts both directly as a kinase 
and indirectly by activating other kinases. For example, MPF 
causes phosphorylation of various proteins of the nuclear 
G1 S 
G1 SG2
MPF activity
Cyclin
concentration
Time
(a) Fluctuation of MPF activity and cyclin concentration during
     the cell cycle
MG 1 S G1G2 MM
Cyclin accum
ulation 
Cdk
Degraded
cyclin
Cyclin is
degraded
Cdk
(b) Molecular mechanisms that help regulate the cell cycle
CyclinMPF
G2
checkpoint
M G2 
     During G1, the degradation
of cyclin continues, and 
the Cdk component of
MPF is recycled.
5
1
     Cyclin combines
with Cdk, producing
MPF. When enough
MPF molecules
accumulate, the cell
passes the G2
checkpoint and
begins mitosis.
2     MPF promotes 
mitosis by phos-
phorylating 
various proteins. 
MPF‘s activity
peaks during 
metaphase.
3     During 
anaphase, the 
cyclin com-
ponent of MPF is 
degraded,
terminating the 
M phase. The
cell enters the 
G1 phase.
4
     Synthesis of cyclin 
begins in late S phase 
and continues through 
G2. Because cyclin is 
protected from degra-
dation during this stage, 
it accumulates.
. Figure 12.16 Molecular control of the cell cycle at the 
G2 checkpoint. The steps of the cell cycle are timed by rhythmic 
fluctuations in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). Here we 
focus on a cyclin-Cdk complex in animal cells called MPF, which acts at 
the G2 checkpoint as a go-ahead signal, triggering the events of mitosis.
VISUAL SKILLS Explain how the events in the diagram in  
(b) are related to the “Time” axis of the graph in (a), beginning at the left.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Paul Nurse: Discovering how 
protein kinases control the cell cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   296 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 298 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 297
the kinetochores of all the chromosomes are properly 
attached to the spindle does the appropriate regula-
tory protein complex become activated. (In this case, 
the regulatory molecule is not a cyclin-Cdk complex 
but, instead, a different complex made up of several 
proteins.) Once activated, the complex sets off a chain 
of molecular events that activates the enzyme separase, 
which cleaves the cohesins, allowing the sister chroma-
tids to separate. This mechanism ensures that daughter 
cells do not end up with missing or extra chromosomes.
There are checkpoints in addition to those in G1, 
G2, and M. For instance, a checkpoint in S phase stops 
cells with DNA damage from proceeding in the cell 
cycle. And, in 2014, researchers presented evidence for 
another checkpoint between anaphase and telophase 
that ensures anaphase is completed and the chromo-
somes are well separated before cytokinesis can begin, 
thus avoiding chromosomal damage.
What about the stop and go-ahead signals 
themselves—what are the signaling molecules? Studies 
using animal cells in culture have led to the identifi-
cation of many external factors, both chemical and 
physical, that can influence cell division. For example, 
cells fail to divide if an essential nutrient is lacking in 
the culture medium. (This is analogous to trying to run 
a washing machine without the water supply hooked 
up; an internal sensor won’t allow the machine to 
continue past the point where water is needed.) And 
even if all other conditions are favorable, most types of 
mammalian cells divide in culture only if the growth 
medium includes specific growth factors. As mentioned 
in Concept 9.1, a growth factor is a protein released 
by certain cells that stimulates other cells to divide. 
Different cell types respond specifically to different 
growth factors or combinations of growth factors.
Consider, for example, platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF), which is made by blood cell fragments called 
platelets. When an injury occurs, platelets release 
PDGF in the vicinity. The experiment illustrated in 
Figure 12.18 demonstrates that PDGF is required for the divi-
sion of cultured fibroblasts, a type of connective tissue cell. 
Fibroblasts have PDGF receptors on their plasma membranes. 
The binding of PDGF molecules to these receptors (which 
are receptor tyrosine kinases; see Figure 9.8) triggers a signal 
transduction pathway that allows the cells to pass the G1 
checkpoint and divide. PDGF stimulates fibroblast division 
not only in the artificial conditions of cell culture but also 
in an animal’s body. Thus, injury results in a proliferation of 
fibroblasts that helps heal the wound.
The effect of an external physical factor on cell division is 
clearly seen in density-dependent inhibition, a phenom-
enon in which crowded cells stop dividing (Figure 12.19a). 
Studies done many years ago showed that cultured cells normally 
divide until they form a single layer of cells on the inner surface 
G1 G1
G0
G1 checkpoint
If a cell receives a go-ahead signal, the
cell continues on in the cell cycle.
In the absence of a go-ahead signal,
a cell exits the cell cycle and enters
G0, a nondividing state.
When all chromosomes are attached
to spindle fibers from both poles,
a go-ahead signal allows the cell to
proceed into anaphase.
A cell in mitosis receives a stop signal
when any of its chromosomes are not
attached to spindle fibers.
G2M
G1
M checkpoint
Prometaphase Metaphase
G2 
checkpoint
Anaphase
G2
M
G1
(a) G1 checkpoint
(b) M checkpoint
. Figure 12.17 Two important checkpoints. At certain checkpoints in the 
cell cycle (red gates), cells do different things depending on the signals they 
receive. Events of the (a) G1 and (b) M checkpoints are shown. In (b), the G2 
checkpoint has already been passed by the cell.
WHAT IF? What might be the result if the cell ignored either checkpoint 
and!progressed through the cell cycle?
of a culture flask, at which point the cells stop dividing. If some 
cells are removed, those bordering the open space begin dividing 
again and continue until the vacancy is filled. Follow-up studies 
revealed that the binding of a cell-surface protein to its counter-
part on an adjoining cell sends a signal to both cells that inhibits 
cell division, preventing them from moving forward in the cell 
cycle, even in the presence of growth factors.
Most animal cells also exhibit anchorage dependence 
(see Figure 12.19a). To divide, they must be attached to some-
thing, such as the inside of a culture flask or the extracellular 
matrix of a tissue. Experiments suggest that, like cell density, 
anchorage is signaled to the cell cycle control system via 
pathways involving plasma membrane proteins and elements 
of the cytoskeleton linked to them.
Density-dependent inhibition and anchorage dependence 
appear to function not only in cell culture but also in the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   297 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 299 ===

298 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
Cells are transferred to 
culture vessels containing 
a basic growth medium 
consisting of glucose, 
amino acids, salts, and 
antibiotics (to prevent
bacterial growth). 
A sample of human
connective tissue is
cut up into small
pieces.
1
2Enzymes are used to 
digest the extracellular 
matrix in the tissue
pieces, resulting in a 
suspension of free
fibroblasts.
3
PDGF is added to half 
the vessels. The culture 
vessels are incubated 
at 37°C for 24 hours.
4
Scalpels
Petri
dish
With PDGF
In the basic growth medium plus
PDGF, the cells proliferate. The 
SEM shows cultured fibroblasts.
Without PDGF
In the basic growth medium
without PDGF (the control),
the cells fail to divide.
10 om
. Figure 12.18 The effect of platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF) on cell division.
body’s tissues, checking the growth of cells at some optimal 
density and location during embryonic development and 
throughout an organism’s life. Cancer cells, which we exam-
ine next, exhibit neither density-dependent inhibition nor 
anchorage dependence (Figure 12.19b).
Loss of Cell Cycle Controls in Cancer Cells
Cancer cells do not heed the normal signals that regulate 
the cell cycle. In culture, they do not stop dividing when 
growth factors are depleted. A logical hypothesis is that can-
cer cells do not need growth factors in their culture medium 
to grow and divide. They may make a required growth factor 
themselves, or they may have an abnormality in the signal-
ing pathway that conveys the growth factor’s signal to the 
cell cycle control system even in the absence of that factor. 
Another possibility is an abnormal cell cycle control system. 
When cells have formed a
complete single layer, they stop
dividing (density-dependent
inhibition).
If some cells are scraped away,
the remaining cells divide to fill
the gap and then stop once they
contact each other.
Cells anchor to dish surface and
divide (anchorage dependence).
(b)
(a)Normal mammalian cells. Cell density is limited to a single layer 
by contact with neighboring cells and the availability of nutrients, 
growth factors, and a substratum for attachment.
Cancer cells. Cancer cells usually continue to divide well beyond
a single layer, forming a clump of overlapping cells. They do not
exhibit anchorage dependence or density-dependent inhibition.
20 om
20 om
. Figure 12.19 Density-dependent inhibition and anchorage 
dependence of cell division. Individual cells are shown 
disproportionately large in the drawings.
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
PDGF signals cells by 
binding to a cell-surface 
receptor tyrosine kinase. If 
you added a chemical that 
blocked phosphorylation, 
how would the results 
differ? (See Figure 9.8.)
In these scenarios, the underlying basis of the abnormality is 
almost always a change in one or more genes (for example, 
a mutation) that alters the function of their protein prod-
ucts, resulting in faulty cell cycle control. We’ll explore the 
molecular basis for such changes in Concept 18.5.
There are other important differences between normal 
cells and cancer cells that reflect malfunctions of the cell 
cycle. If and when they stop dividing, cancer cells do so at 
random points in the cycle, rather than at the normal check-
points. Moreover, cancer cells can go on dividing indefinitely 
in culture if they are given a continual supply of nutrients; 
in essence, they are “immortal.” A striking example is a cell 
line that has been reproducing in culture since 1951. Cells 
of this line are called HeLa cells because their original source 
was a tumor removed from a woman named Henrietta Lacks. 
(Neither Ms. Lacks nor her family gave permission or even 
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   298 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 300 ===

 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 299
is an ongoing debate. Their metabolism may be altered, and 
they may cease to function in any constructive way. Abnormal 
changes on the cell surface cause cancer cells to lose attachments 
to neighboring cells and the extracellular matrix, allowing them 
to spread into nearby tissues. Cancer cells may also secrete sig-
naling molecules that cause blood vessels to grow toward the 
tumor. A few tumor cells may separate from the original tumor, 
enter blood vessels and lymph vessels, and travel to other parts 
of the body. There, they may proliferate and form a new tumor. 
This spread of cancer cells to locations distant from their original 
site is called metastasis (see Figure 12.20).
A tumor that appears to be localized may be treated with 
high-energy radiation, which damages DNA in cancer cells 
much more than DNA in normal cells, apparently because 
the majority of cancer cells have lost the ability to repair such 
damage. To treat known or suspected metastatic tumors, che-
motherapy is used, in which drugs that are toxic to actively 
dividing cells are administered through the circulatory sys-
tem. As you might expect, chemotherapeutic drugs interfere 
with specific steps in the cell cycle. For example, the drug 
Taxol freezes the mitotic spindle by preventing microtubule 
depolymerization, which stops actively dividing cells from 
proceeding past metaphase and leads to their destruction. 
The side effects of chemotherapy are due to the effects of the 
drugs on normal cells that divide frequently, due to the func-
tion of that cell type in the organism. For example, nausea 
results from chemotherapy’s effects on intestinal cells, hair 
loss from effects on hair follicle cells, and susceptibility to 
infection from effects on immune system cells. You can work 
with data from an experiment involving a potential chemo-
therapeutic agent in the Scientific Skills Exercise.
Over the past several decades, researchers have produced a 
flood of valuable information about cell-signaling pathways 
and how their malfunction contributes to the development 
of cancer through effects on the cell cycle. Coupled with new 
knew about the propagation and use of her cells, which have 
helped biologists make countless significant discoveries over 
the years.) Cells in culture that acquire the ability to divide 
indefinitely are said to have undergone a process called 
transformation, causing them to behave (in cell division, 
at least) like cancer cells. By contrast, nearly all normal, non-
transformed mammalian cells growing in culture divide only 
about 20 to 50 times before they stop dividing, age, and die. 
Finally, cancer cells evade the normal controls that trigger 
a cell to undergo apoptosis when something is wrong—for 
example, when an irreparable mistake has occurred during 
DNA replication preceding mitosis.
Abnormal cell behavior in the body can be catastrophic. 
The problem begins when a single cell in a tissue undergoes 
the first of many steps that convert a normal cell to a cancer 
cell. Such a cell often has altered proteins on its surface, and 
the body’s immune system normally recognizes the cell as 
“nonself”—an insurgent—and destroys it. However, if the 
cell evades destruction, it may proliferate and form a tumor, 
a mass of abnormal cells within otherwise normal tissue. The 
abnormal cells may remain at the original site if their genetic 
and cellular changes don’t allow them to move to or survive at 
another site. In that case, the tumor is called a benign tumor. 
Most benign tumors do not cause serious problems (depending 
on their location) and can be removed by surgery. In contrast, 
a malignant tumor includes cells whose genetic and cellular 
changes enable them to spread to new tissues and impair the 
functions of one or more organs; these cells are also sometimes 
called transformed cells (although usage of this term is generally 
restricted to cells in culture). An individual with a malignant 
tumor is said to have cancer (Figure 12.20).
The changes that have occurred in cells of malignant tumors 
show up in many ways besides excessive proliferation. These 
cells may have unusual numbers of chromosomes, though 
whether this is a cause or an effect of tumor-related changes 
2Cancer cells invade
neighboring tissue.
1 3A tumor grows from
a single cancer cell.
Tumor
Cancer cells spread through 
lymph and blood vessels to 
other parts of the body.
4A small percentage of cancer
cells may metastasize to
another part of the body.
Lymph
vessel
Blood
vessel
Cancer
cell Metastatic
tumor
Breast cancer cell (colorized 
SEM)
Glandular
tissue
5 om. Figure 12.20 The growth and metastasis of a malignant breast tumor. A series of genetic and 
cellular changes contribute to a tumor becoming malignant (cancerous). The cells of malignant tumors 
grow in an uncontrolled way and can spread to neighboring tissues and, via lymph and blood  
vessels, to other parts of the body (metastasis).
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: How Tumors Grow
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   299 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 301 ===

300 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
At What Phase Is the Cell Cycle Arrested by an 
Inhibitor? Many medical treatments are aimed at stopping can-
cer cell proliferation by blocking the cell cycle of cancerous tumor 
cells. One potential treatment is a cell cycle inhibitor derived 
from human umbilical cord stem cells. In this exercise, you will 
compare two histograms to determine where in the cell cycle the 
inhibitor blocks the division of cancer cells.
How the Experiment Was Done In the treated sample, human 
glioblastoma (brain cancer) cells were grown in tissue culture in 
the presence of the inhibitor, while a control sample of glioblas-
toma cells was grown in its absence. After 72 hours of growth, 
the two cell samples were harvested. To get a “snapshot” of the 
phase of the cell cycle each cell was in at that time, the samples 
were treated with a fluorescent chemical that binds to DNA and 
then run through a flow cytometer, an instrument that records 
the fluorescence level of each cell. Computer software then 
graphed the number of cells in each sample with a particular 
fluorescence level, as shown below.
Data from the Experiment
200
0
40
ABC ABC
Control Treated
80
120
160
0 200 400 600
Amount of fluorescence per cell (fluorescence units)
Number of cells
0 200 400 600
The data are plotted in a type of graph called a histogram 
(above), which groups the values for a numeric variable on 
the x-axis into intervals. A histogram allows you to see how all 
the experimental subjects (cells, in this case) are distributed 
along a continuous variable (amount of fluorescence). In 
these histograms, the bars are so narrow that the data appear 
Interpreting Histograms
to follow a curve for which 
you can detect peaks and dips. 
Each narrow bar represents the 
number of cells observed to have 
a level of fluorescence in the 
range of that interval. This in turn 
indicates the relative amount 
of DNA in those cells. Overall, 
comparing the two histograms allows you to see how the DNA 
content of this cell population is altered by the treatment.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Study the data in the histograms. (a) Which axis indirectly 
shows the relative amount of DNA per cell? Explain your an-
swer. (b) In the control sample, compare the first peak in the 
histogram (in region A) to the second peak (in region C). Which 
peak shows the population of cells with the higher amount of 
DNA per cell? Explain. (For additional information about histo-
grams, see the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
2. (a) In the control sample histogram, identify the phase of the cell 
cycle (G1, S, or G2) of the population of cells in each region de-
lineated by vertical lines. Label the histogram with these phases 
and explain your answer. (b) Does the S phase population of cells 
show a distinct peak in the histogram? Why or why not?
3. The histogram representing the treated sample shows the ef-
fect of growing the cancer cells alongside human umbilical 
cord stem cells that produce the potential inhibitor. (a) Label 
the histogram with the cell cycle phases. Which phase of the 
cell cycle has the greatest number of cells in the treated sam-
ple? Explain. (b) Compare the distribution of cells among G1, S, 
and G2 phases in the control and treated samples. What does 
this tell you about the cells in the treated sample? (c) Based on 
what you learned in Concept 12.3, propose a mechanism by 
which the stem cell–derived inhibitor might arrest the cancer 
cell cycle at this stage. (More than one answer is possible.)
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Data from K. K. Velpula et al., Regulation of glioblastoma progression by 
cord blood stem cells is mediated by downregulation of cyclin D1, PLoS ONE 
6(3):e18017 (2011).
molecular techniques, such as the ability to rapidly sequence 
the DNA of cells in a particular tumor, medical treatments for 
cancer are beginning to become more “personalized” to a par-
ticular patient’s tumor.
For example, the cells of roughly 20% of breast cancer 
tumors show abnormally high amounts of a cell-surface recep-
tor tyrosine kinase called HER2, and many show an increase in 
the number of estrogen receptor (ER) molecules, intracellular 
receptors that can trigger cell division. Based on lab findings, 
a physician can prescribe chemotherapy with a molecule that 
blocks the function of the specific protein (Herceptin for HER2 
and tamoxifen for ERs). Treatment using these agents, when 
appropriate, has led to increased survival rates and fewer can-
cer recurrences (see Make Connections Figure 18.27).
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Bruce Alberts:  
Cancer control and careers in science
CONCEPT CHECK 12.3
1. In Figure 12.14, why do the nuclei resulting from experi-
ment 2 contain different amounts of DNA?
2. How does MPF allow a cell to pass the G2 phase checkpoint 
and enter mitosis? (See Figure 12.16.)
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how receptor tyrosine 
kinases and intracellular receptors might function in 
triggering cell division. (Review Figures 9.8 and 9.9 and 
Concept 9.2.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
c Human brain cancer cell
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   300 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 302 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 12.1
Most cell division results in genetically identical 
daughter cells (pp. 285–287)
• Unicellular organisms reproduce by cell division; multicellular 
organisms depend on cell division for their development from a 
fertilized egg and for growth and repair.
• The genetic material (DNA) of a cell—its genome—is parti-
tioned among chromosomes. Each eukaryotic chromosome 
consists of one DNA molecule associated with many proteins. 
Together, the complex of DNA and associated proteins is called 
chromatin. The chromatin of a chromosome exists in dif-
ferent states of condensation at different times. In animals, 
gametes have one set of chromosomes and somatic cells 
have two sets.
• Cells replicate their genetic material before they divide, each 
daughter cell receiving a copy of the DNA. Prior to cell divi-
sion, chromosomes are duplicated. Each one then consists of 
two identical sister chromatids joined along their lengths by 
sister chromatid cohesion and held most tightly together at a 
constricted region at the centromeres. When this cohesion is 
broken, the chromatids separate during cell division, becoming 
the chromosomes of the daughter cells. Eukaryotic cell division 
consists of mitosis (division of the nucleus) and cytokinesis 
(division of the cytoplasm).
? Differentiate between these terms: chromosome, chromatin, and 
chromatid.
CONCEPT 12.2
The mitotic phase alternates with interphase in the cell 
cycle (pp. 287–294)
• Cell division is part of the cell cycle, an ordered sequence of 
events in the life of a cell.
• Between divisions, a cell is in interphase: the G1, S, and G2 
phases. The cell grows throughout interphase, with DNA being 
replicated during the synthesis (S) phase. Mitosis and cytokinesis 
make up the mitotic (M) phase of the cell cycle.
• The mitotic spindle, made up of microtubules, con-
trols chromosome movement during mitosis. In animal 
cells, it arises from the centrosomes and includes spindle 
microtubules and asters. Some spindle microtubules attach 
to the kinetochores of chromosomes and move the chro-
mosomes to the metaphase plate. After sister chromatids 
separate, motor proteins move them along kinetochore mi-
crotubules toward opposite ends of the cell. The cell elongates 
when motor proteins push nonkinetochore microtubules from 
opposite poles away from each other.
• Mitosis is usually followed by cytokinesis. Animal cells carry out 
cytokinesis by cleavage, and plant cells form a cell plate.
• During binary fission in bacteria, the chromosome replicates 
and the daughter chromosomes actively move apart. Some of the 
proteins involved in bacterial binary fission are related to eukary-
otic actin and tubulin.
• Since prokaryotes preceded eukaryotes by more than a billion 
years, it is likely that mitosis evolved from prokaryotic cell divi-
sion. Certain unicellular eukaryotes exhibit mechanisms of cell 
division that may be similar to those of ancestors of existing eu-
karyotes. Such mechanisms might represent intermediate steps in 
the evolution of mitosis.
? In which of the three phases of interphase and the stages of mitosis 
do chromosomes exist as single DNA molecules?
CONCEPT 12.3
The eukaryotic cell cycle is regulated by a molecular 
control system (pp. 294–300)
• Signaling molecules present in the cytoplasm regulate progress 
through the cell cycle.
• In the  cell cycle control system, cyclic changes in regula-
tory proteins—including cyclins and cyclin-dependent  
kinases (Cdks)—work as a cell cycle clock. The cell cycle 
stops at specific checkpoints until a go-ahead signal is re-
ceived; important checkpoints occur in G1, G2, and M phases. 
Internal and external signals control the cell cycle checkpoints 
via signal transduction pathways. Most cells exhibit density-
dependent inhibition of cell division as well as anchorage 
dependence.
• Cancer cells elude normal cell cycle regulation and divide un-
checked, forming tumors. Malignant tumors invade nearby 
tissues and can undergo metastasis, exporting cancer cells to 
other sites, where they may form secondary tumors.
? Explain the significance of the G1, G2, and M checkpoints and the 
go-ahead signals involved in the cell cycle control system.
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
12 Chapter Review
 CHAPTER 12  Mitosis 301
G1
Cytokinesis
Telophase and
Cytokinesis
Anaphase
Metaphase
Mitosis
Prometaphase
Prophase
MITOTIC
(M) PHASE
G2
S
INTERPHASE 
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–8 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
9. VISUAL SKILLS The light micrograph shows dividing cells 
near the tip of an onion root. Identify a cell in each of the 
following stages: prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, 
anaphase, and telophase. Describe the major events occurr-
ing at each stage.
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   301 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 303 ===

302 UNIT TWO  Cell Biology
what you know about chromosome movement and spindle 
changes during anaphase, predict which type of motor 
proteins would be present on (a) kinetochore microtubules 
and!(b)!nonkinetochore microtubules.
13. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION Unlike 
eukaryotes, most of the genes of bacteria are contained in 
a single, circular DNA molecule. In a short essay (100–150 
words), explain how the circular bacterial genome is replicated 
and copies of the genome are distributed equally to two 
daughter cells.
14. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Shown here are two HeLa cancer cells that are just completing 
cytokinesis. Explain how the cell division of cancer cells like 
these is misregulated. Identify genetic and other changes 
that might have caused these cells to escape normal cell cycle 
regulation.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
10. DRAW IT Draw one eukaryotic chromosome as it would 
appear during interphase, during each of the stages of 
mitosis, and during cytokinesis. Also draw and label the 
nuclear envelope and any microtubules attached to the 
chromosome(s).
11. EVOLUTION CONNECTION The result of mitosis is that the 
daughter cells end up with the same number of chromosomes 
that the parent cell had. Another potential way to maintain the 
number of chromosomes would be to carry out cell division 
first and then duplicate the chromosomes in each daughter 
cell. Assess whether this would be an equally good way of 
organizing the cell cycle. Explain why evolution has not led to 
this alternative.
12. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Although both ends of a microtubule 
can gain or lose subunits, one end (called the plus end) 
polymerizes and depolymerizes at a higher rate than the 
other end (the minus end). For spindle microtubules, the plus 
ends are in the center of the spindle, and the minus ends are 
at the poles. Motor proteins that move along microtubules 
specialize in walking either toward the plus end or toward 
the minus end; the two types are called plus end–directed 
and minus end–directed motor proteins, respectively. Given 
URRY1637_12_GE_C12_PRF.indd   302 14/03/20   1:17 AM

=== SIDE 304 ===

THE GENETIC BASIS OF LIFEUnit 3 
When did you first decide to be  
a biologist?
In high school, my parents asked me, 
“What are you thinking you’ll do with your 
life—become a doctor or a lawyer?” I said, 
“Not at all. I really like biology.” In spite 
of his concern about my future  career, my 
father told me I must study what I loved, 
so that I could be happy in my life. I re-
ally appreciated his words! So I went to 
university and studied  biology. When you 
like biology, initially you get attracted 
because of the things you see—animals 
and plants. But when you see microscopic 
living beings for the first time, and they’re 
moving around, that’s really amazing! 
So, I decided to focus on microbiology.
What did you study as a graduate 
student?
I studied prokaryotes that live in salt ponds. 
These weird organisms can tolerate very 
high salt concentrations. I was interested 
in doing molecular biology, which had 
not been done in that university before—I 
knew that would be a challenge, and I love 
challenges. There weren’t many genome se-
quences available at that time, in the early 
1990s, but we had cloned a few sequences, 
and we had indirect evidence they might 
be related to adaptation to salinity. One 
of the DNA sequences 
had these regularly 
spaced repeats 
that were partially 
palindromic (read-
ing the same for-
ward and backward), so 
they could form secondary structures. We 
thought maybe these repeats were  affected 
by salinity and would in turn affect gene 
expression, but we were absolutely wrong! 
At the end of my Ph.D. thesis, all I could say 
was, “We have found regularly interspaced 
repeats that are expressed by the cell, and 
they could be very important.”
What made you continue to study 
these repeats?
When you find something in your thesis, 
you believe that it belongs to you—you 
have to try to answer that question. No 
one could figure out the role that these 
repeats played. However, others had 
found similar repeats in bacteria 
like E. coli and another very 
 d i s t a n t l y - r e l a t e d  b a c t e r i a l  s p e-
cies. That was an important 
finding that pushed me to 
keep working on the repeats, 
because it meant the repeats 
must be doing something 
important for them to stay in the genomes 
of various prokaryotes over such long evo-
lutionary time. Evolution is so fundamental 
to biology, to understanding everything.
How did you figure out what the 
repeats were doing?
I started wondering about the sequences 
between the repeats, the so-called 
“spacers.” Where did they come from? I 
compared the spacer sequences to genome 
database sequences. By 2000 or 2001, 
many more genome sequences were avail-
able. Finally, in 2003, I found 
a spacer in E. coli whose 
sequence was identical to 
the sequence of a virus that 
infects E. coli. Even more 
interesting, the strain of  
E. coli with that spacer could not 
be infected by that virus. I checked more 
and more spacer sequences, and when a 
spacer sequence matched a  sequence in 
the database, the match was always to 
the sequence of a virus that could no lon-
ger infect that species. So I realized these 
bacteria keep a ”memory” of the viruses 
that infect them, and that the repeat re-
gions were part of an immune system—an 
unexpected and very surprising finding. I 
proposed naming the repeats Clustered 
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic 
Repeats, or CRISPR, and to my surprise, the 
name took hold.
What is your advice to a student 
considering a career in biology?
Studying biology is basically just say-
ing “Wow!” all the time. In science, the 
truth changes very fast. The most im-
portant thing is to be open. Be ready 
to hear something that destroys what 
you believe—because biology is a 
fast-moving field, a field that evolves a 
lot. Knowledge will change.
Dr. Francisco Mojica is a Professor of 
Microbiology at the Universidad de Alicante in 
Spain, where he studies CRISPR sequences. His par-
ents fostered in him a love of nature, and he real-
ized in high school that he was most interested in 
biology. In college, when he first looked through 
a microscope and saw small single-celled “living 
beings” moving around, he was captivated, and 
he has spent his career focusing on prokaryotes. 
While in graduate school in the 1990s, he found 
the prokaryotic DNA repeats that he later named 
CRISPR repeats, and he spent the next decade 
 establishing their role as a prokaryotic immune 
 system. Dr. Mojica’s lab currently studies the 
mysteries that still surround CRISPR, trying to 
 understand every single aspect of its mechanism  
of action and regulation.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Francisco Mojica
“Studying biology 
is basically just saying 
‘Wow!’ all the time.”
m Dr. Mojica cultured and 
analyzed prokaryotes 
from this salt lake in Spain, 
leading to his discovery of 
CRISPR.  303
URRY1637_12_GE_U03_PRF.indd   303 14/03/20   2:03 AM

=== SIDE 305 ===

Figure 13.1 The family members shown in this photo have some similar features. 
Offspring resemble their parents more than they do unrelated individuals.
Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis13
What biological mechanisms account for the 
resemblance between offspring and their parents?
Meiosis in father’s testes,
which produce sperm
Meiosis in mother’s ovaries,
which produce eggs
Meiosis is a special type of cell division that produces cells with half the chromosomes of the 
parent cell. It occurs only in specialized cells, such as the cells of testes and ovaries in humans.
Fertilization unites a sperm and egg, 
re-establishing pairs of homologous 
chromosomes, with both paternal and 
maternal genes.
Chromosomes are duplicated 
before meiosis begins.
Meiosis I: 
Homologs are separated.
Meiosis II: 
Sister chromatids are 
separated.
Humans have 46 chromosomes. Here, 
each parent cell shows only one pair of 
homologous chromosomes (homologs). 
(They carry genes for the same characters.)
The chromosome in each sperm is one 
of a pair of homologs.
The chromosome in each egg is one 
of a pair of homologs.
Paternal
chromosome
Maternal
chromosome
Fertilized egg (first 
cell of offspring)
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Figure 13.10 Walkthrough: A Comparison 
of Mitosis and Meiosis
• BioFlix® Animation: Meiosis
• Animation: Genetic Variation from 
Crossing Over
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: Meiosis Animation
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Meiosis (3 of 3): 
Determinants of Heredity and Genetic 
Variation
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• Meiosis (Concept 13.3)
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Figure 13.1 
presents the events of meiosis as a 
simplified diagram. As you learn more 
about meiosis, draw a detailed diagram 
of the stages of meiosis, starting with 
the sketch below. Include explanatory 
labels. Compare your visual study guides 
of mitosis (from Chapter 12) and meiosis, 
listing similarities and differences.
13.1 Offspring acquire genes from parents 
by inheriting chromosomes p. 305
13.2 Fertilization and meiosis alternate 
in sexual life cycles p. 306
13.3 Meiosis reduces the number of 
chromosome sets from diploid to 
haploid p. 309
13.4 Genetic variation produced in 
sexual life cycles contributes to 
evolution p. 315
KEY CONCEPTS
Cell ready to
start meiosis
(chromosomes
have been duplicated)
Meiosis
304
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   304 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 306 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 305
(plural, loci; from the Latin, meaning “place”). Our genetic endow-
ment (our genome) consists of the genes and other DNA that make 
up the chromosomes we inherited from our parents.
Comparison of Asexual and Sexual Reproduction
Only organisms that reproduce asexually have offspring that are 
exact genetic copies of themselves. In asexual reproduction, a 
single individual (like a yeast cell or an amoeba; see Figure 12.2a) 
is the sole parent and passes copies of all its genes to its offspring 
without the fusion of gametes. For example, single-celled eukaryotic 
organisms can reproduce asexually by mitotic cell division, in which 
DNA is copied and allocated equally to two daughter cells. The 
genomes of the offspring are virtually exact copies of the parent’s 
genome. Some multicellular organisms are also capable of reproduc-
ing asexually (Figure 13.2). Because the cells of the offspring arise 
via mitosis in the parent, the offspring is usually genetically identi-
cal to its parent. An individual that reproduces asexually gives rise 
to a clone, an individual or group of individuals that are genetically 
identical to the parent. Genetic differences occasionally arise in 
asexually reproducing organisms as a result of changes in the DNA 
called mutations, which we will discuss in Concept 17.5.
In sexual reproduction, two parents give rise to offspring that 
have unique combinations of genes inherited from the two parents. In 
contrast to a clone, offspring of sexual reproduction vary genetically 
from their siblings and both parents: They are variations on a common 
theme of family resemblance, not exact replicas. Genetic variation 
like that shown in Figure 13.1 is an important consequence of sexual 
reproduction. What mechanisms generate this genetic variation? The 
key is the behavior of chromosomes during the sexual life cycle.
Offspring acquire genes from 
parents by inheriting chromosomes
Friends may tell you that you have your mother’s nose or 
your father’s eyes—although they don’t mean that literally, of 
course. The transmission of traits from one generation to the 
next is called inheritance, or heredity (from the Latin heres, 
heir). At the same time, sons and daughters are not identical 
copies of either parent or of their siblings. Along with inherited 
similarity, there is also variation. The study of both heredity 
and inherited variation is called genetics.
Inheritance of Genes
Parents endow their offspring with coded information in the 
form of hereditary units called genes. The genes we inherit 
from our mothers and fathers are our genetic link to our par-
ents, and they account for family resemblances such as shared 
eye color or freckles. Our genes program specific traits that 
emerge as we develop from fertilized eggs into adults.
The genetic program is written in the language of DNA, 
the polymer of four different nucleotides you learned about in 
Concepts 1.1 and 5.5. Inherited information is passed on in the 
form of each gene’s specific sequence of DNA nucleotides, much as 
printed information is communicated in the form of meaningful 
sequences of letters. In both cases, the language is symbolic. Just 
as your brain translates the word apple into a mental image of the 
fruit, cells translate genes into freckles and other features. Most 
genes program cells to synthesize specific enzymes and other pro-
teins, whose cumulative action produces an organism’s inherited 
traits. The programming of these traits in the form of DNA is one of 
the unifying themes of biology.
The transmission of hereditary traits 
has its molecular basis in the replication 
of DNA, which produces copies of genes 
that can be passed from parents to off-
spring. In animals and plants, reproductive 
cells called gametes are the vehicles that 
transmit genes from one generation to the 
next. During fertilization, male and female 
gametes (sperm and eggs) unite, passing on 
genes of both parents to their offspring.
Except for small amounts of DNA in mitochondria and 
chloroplasts, the DNA of a eukaryotic cell is packaged into chro-
mosomes within the nucleus. Every species has a characteristic 
number of chromosomes. For example, humans have 46 chro-
mosomes in their somatic cells—all cells of the body except 
the gametes and their precursors. Each chromosome consists of a 
single long DNA molecule, elaborately coiled in association with 
various proteins. One chromosome includes several hundred 
to a few thousand genes, each gene being a precise sequence of 
nucleotides along the DNA molecule. A gene’s specific location 
along the length of a chromosome is called the gene’s locus 
CONCEPT 13.1
Parent
0.5 mm
Bud
(a) Hydra (b) Redwoods
. Figure 13.2 Asexual reproduction in two multicellular 
organisms. (a) This relatively simple animal, a hydra, reproduces 
by budding. The bud, a localized mass of mitotically dividing cells, 
develops into a small hydra, which detaches from the parent (LM). 
(b) All the trees in this circle of redwoods arose asexually from a 
single parent tree, whose stump is in the center of the circle.
 Mastering Biology Video: Hydra Budding  
Animation: Asexual Reproduction
m Sperm and egg
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   305 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 307 ===

306 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
CONCEPT CHECK 13.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Using your knowledge of gene expres-
sion in a cell, explain what causes the traits of parents (such as 
hair color) to show up in their offspring. (See Concept 5.5.)
2. Describe how an asexually reproducing eukaryotic organ-
ism produces offspring that are genetically identical to each 
other and to their parents.
3. WHAT IF? A horticulturalist breeds orchids, trying to obtain 
a plant with a unique combination of desirable traits. After 
many years, she finally succeeds, and wants to produce more 
plants like this one. Discuss whether she should crossbreed it 
with another plant or cause it to undergo asexual reproduc-
tion (forming a clone),  and why.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 13.2
Fertilization and meiosis 
alternate in sexual life cycles
A life cycle is the generation-to-generation sequence of stages 
in the reproductive history of an organism, from conception to 
production of its own offspring. In this section, we use humans 
as an example to track the behavior of chromosomes through 
the sexual life cycle. We begin by considering the chromo-
some count in human somatic cells and gametes. We will 
then explore how the behavior of chromosomes relates to the 
human life cycle and other types of sexual life cycles.
Sets of Chromosomes in Human Cells
In humans, each somatic cell has 46 chromosomes. Before 
mitosis begins, the chromosomes are duplicated. During 
mitosis, the chromosomes become condensed enough to be 
visible under a light microscope. At this point, they can be 
distinguished from one another by their size, the position of 
their centromeres, and the pattern of colored bands produced 
by certain chromatin-binding stains.
Careful examination of a micrograph of the 46 human 
chromosomes from a single cell in mitosis reveals that there 
are two chromosomes of each of 23 types. This becomes clear 
when images of the chromosomes are arranged in pairs, starting 
with the longest chromosomes. The resulting ordered display 
is called a karyotype (Figure 13.3). The two chromosomes 
of a pair have the same length, centromere position, and stain-
ing pattern: These are called homologous chromosomes 
(or  homologs). Both chromosomes of each pair carry genes 
controlling the same inherited characters. For example, if a gene 
for eye color is situated at a particular locus on a certain chromo-
some, then its homologous chromosome (its homolog) will also 
have a version of the eye-color gene at the equivalent locus.
The two chromosomes referred to as X and Y are an impor-
tant exception to the general pattern of homologous chromo-
somes in human somatic cells. Typically, human females have 
a homologous pair of X chromosomes (XX), while males have 
one X and one Y chromosome (XY; see Figure 13.3). Only small 
Application A karyotype is a display of condensed chromosomes 
arranged in pairs. Karyotyping can be used to screen for defective 
chromosomes or abnormal numbers of chromosomes associated 
with certain congenital disorders, such as Down syndrome.
Technique Karyotypes are prepared from isolated somatic 
cells, which are treated with a drug to stimulate mitosis and 
then grown in culture for several days. Cells arrested when the 
chromosomes are most highly condensed—at metaphase—are 
stained and then viewed with a microscope equipped with a 
digital camera. An image of the chromosomes is displayed on a 
computer monitor, and digital software is used to arrange them 
in pairs according to their appearance.
Pair of homologous 
chromosomes
Centromeres
(one per sister chromatid)
Sister
chromatids
Metaphase
chromosome
(duplicated) 
5 om
Karyotype
Results This karyotype shows the chromosomes from a human 
male (as seen by the presence of the XY chromosome pair), colored 
to emphasize their chromosome banding patterns. The size of the 
chromosome, position of the centromere, and pattern of stained 
bands help identify specific chromosomes. Although difficult to 
discern in the karyotype, each metaphase chromosome consists of 
two closely attached sister chromatids (see the diagram of the first 
pair of homologous duplicated chromosomes).
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain why each chromosome in the 
karyotype consists of two sister chromatids. (See Figures 12.6 and 12.7.)
Preparing a Karyotype
. Figure 13.3 Research Method
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   306 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 308 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 307
single sex chromosome. An unfertilized egg contains an X chro-
mosome; a sperm contains either an X or a Y chromosome.
Each sexually reproducing species has a characteristic dip-
loid and haploid number. For example, the fruit fly Drosophila 
melanogaster has a diploid number (2n) of 8 and a haploid 
number (n) of 4, while for dogs, 2n is 78 and n is 39. The chro-
mosome number generally does not correlate with the size or 
complexity of a species’ genome; it simply reflects how many 
linear pieces of DNA make up the genome, which is a function 
of the evolutionary history of that species (see Concept 20.5).  
Now let’s consider chromosome behavior during sexual life 
cycles. We’ll use the human life cycle as an example.
Behavior of Chromosome Sets in the 
Human Life Cycle
The human life cycle begins when a haploid sperm from the 
father fuses with a haploid egg from the mother (Figure 13.5). 
This union of gametes, culminating in fusion of their nuclei, is 
parts of the X and Y are homologous. Most of the genes carried on 
the X chromosome do not have counterparts on the tiny Y, and 
the Y chromosome has genes lacking on the X. Due to their role 
in sex determination, the X and Y chromosomes are called sex 
 c h r o m o s o m e s. The other chromosomes are called autosomes.
The occurrence of pairs of homologous chromosomes in 
each human somatic cell is a consequence of our sexual origins. 
We inherit one chromosome of a pair from each parent. Thus, 
the 46 chromosomes in our somatic cells are actually two sets of 
23 chromosomes—a maternal set (from our mother) and a pater-
nal set (from our father). The number of chromosomes in a single 
set is represented by n. Any cell with two chromosome sets is called 
a diploid cell and has a diploid number of chromosomes, abbre-
viated 2n. For humans, the diploid number is 46 (2n=46), the 
number of chromosomes in our somatic cells. In a cell in which 
DNA synthesis has occurred, all the chromosomes are duplicated, 
and therefore each consists of two identical sister chromatids, asso-
ciated closely at the centromere and along the arms. (Even though 
the chromosomes are duplicated, we still say the cell is diploid, or 
2n. This is because it has only two sets of information regardless of 
the number of chromatids, which are merely copies of the infor-
mation in one set.) Figure 13.4 helps clarify the various terms that 
we use to describe duplicated chromosomes in a diploid cell.
Unlike somatic cells, gametes contain a single set of chromo-
somes. Such cells are called haploid cells, and each has a haploid 
number of chromosomes (n). For humans, the haploid number 
is 23 (n=23). The set of 23 consists of the 22 autosomes plus a 
Key Maternal set of chromosomes (n = 3)
Sister chromatids
of one duplicated
chromosome
Two nonsister
chromatids in 
a homologous pair
2n = 6
Paternal set of chromosomes (n = 3)
Centromeres
Pair of homologous
chromosomes
(one from each set)
. Figure 13.4 Describing chromosomes. A cell from an 
organism with a diploid number of 6 (2n=6) is depicted here 
following chromosome duplication and condensation. Each of 
the six duplicated chromosomes consists of two sister chromatids 
associated closely along their lengths. Each homologous pair is 
composed of one chromosome from the maternal set (red) and 
one from the paternal set (blue). Each set is made up of three 
chromosomes in this example (long, medium, and short). Together, 
one maternal and one paternal chromatid in a pair of homologous 
chromosomes are called nonsister chromatids.
VISUAL SKILLS How many sets of chromosomes are present in this 
diagram? How many pairs of homologous chromosomes are present? If 
the phases of mitosis in Figure 12.7 were redrawn using the color scheme 
shown in this figure, describe how the six chromosomes would be colored.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Chromosomes
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
MEIOSIS
Multicellular diploid
adults (2n = 46)
Diploid
zygote
(2n = 46)
Testis
Sperm (n)
Egg (n)
Haploid gametes (n = 23)
Ovary
Mitosis and
development
FERTILIZATION
Key
. Figure 13.5 The human life cycle. In each generation, the 
number of chromosome sets per cell is halved during meiosis but 
doubles at fertilization. For humans, the number of chromosomes 
in a haploid cell is 23, consisting of one set (n=23); the number of 
chromosomes in the diploid zygote and all somatic cells arising from 
it is 46, consisting of two sets (2n=46). 
 Mastering Biology Animation: The Human Life Cycle
This figure introduces a color code that will be used for other life 
cycles later in this book. The aqua arrows identify haploid stages 
of a life cycle, and the tan arrows identify diploid stages.
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   307 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 309 ===

308 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
The Variety of Sexual Life Cycles
Although the alternation of meiosis and fertilization is com-
mon to all organisms that reproduce sexually, the timing of 
these two events in the life cycle varies, depending on the spe-
cies. These variations can be grouped into three main types of 
life cycles. In the type that occurs in humans and most other 
animals, gametes are the only haploid cells (Figure 13.6a). 
Meiosis occurs in germ cells during the production of gam-
etes, which undergo no further cell division prior to fertiliza-
tion. After fertilization, the diploid zygote divides by mitosis, 
producing a multicellular organism that is diploid.
Plants and some species of algae exhibit a second type of life 
cycle called alternation of generations (Figure 13.6b). This 
type includes both diploid and haploid stages that are multicel-
lular. The multicellular diploid stage is called the sporophyte. 
Meiosis in the sporophyte produces haploid cells called spores. 
Unlike a gamete, a haploid spore doesn’t fuse with another cell 
but divides mitotically, generating a multicellular haploid stage 
called the gametophyte. Cells of the gametophyte give rise to 
gametes by mitosis. Fusion of two haploid gametes at fertiliza-
tion results in a diploid zygote, which develops into the next 
sporophyte generation. Therefore, in this type of life cycle, the 
sporophyte generation produces a gametophyte as its offspring, 
and the gametophyte generation produces a sporophyte. The 
name alternation of generations fits well for this type of life cycle.
A third type of life cycle occurs in most fungi and some pro-
tists, including some algae (Figure 13.6c). After gametes fuse 
and form a diploid zygote, meiosis occurs without a multicellular 
diploid offspring developing. Meiosis produces not gametes but 
called fertilization. The resulting fertilized egg, or zygote, is 
diploid because it contains two haploid sets of chromosomes 
bearing genes representing the maternal and paternal family 
lines. As a human develops into a sexually mature adult, mitosis 
of the zygote and its descendant cells generates all the somatic 
cells of the body. Both chromosome sets in the zygote and all the 
genes they carry are passed with precision to the somatic cells.
The only cells of the human body not produced by mitosis 
are the gametes, which develop from specialized cells called germ 
cells in the gonads—ovaries in females and testes in males (see 
Figure 13.5). Imagine what would happen if human gametes were 
made by mitosis: They would be diploid like the somatic cells. 
At the next round of fertilization, when two gametes fused, the 
normal chromosome number of 46 would double to 92, and each 
subsequent generation would double the number of chromo-
somes yet again. This does not happen, however, because in sexu-
ally reproducing organisms, gamete formation involves a type of 
cell division called meiosis. This type of cell division reduces the 
number of sets of chromosomes from two in the parent cell to 
one in each gamete, counterbalancing the doubling that occurs at 
fertilization. As a result of meiosis, each human sperm and egg is 
haploid (n=23). Fertilization restores the diploid condition by 
combining two sets of chromosomes, and the human life cycle is 
repeated, generation after generation (see Figure 13.5).
The steps of the human life cycle are typical of many sexu-
ally reproducing animals. Indeed, fertilization and meiosis 
are also the hallmarks of sexual reproduction in plants, fungi, 
and protists just as in animals. Fertilization and meiosis alter-
nate in sexual life cycles, maintaining a constant number of 
chromosomes in a species from one generation to the next.
MEIOSIS FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS FERTILIZATION
Mitosis
Mitosis Mitosis
(b) Plants and some algae
Gametes
Gametes
Zygote
Zygote
Haploid multi-
cellular organism 
(gametophyte)
Diploid
multicellular
organism
(sporophyte)
n n
n n n n
n
n
n
n
n
2n 2n FERTILIZATIONMEIOSIS
Mitosis
Spores
2n
2n
2n
n Mitosis Mitosis
(c) Most fungi and some protists
Gametes
Zygote
Haploid unicellular or
multicellular organism
n
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
(a) Animals
Diploid
multicellular
organism
. Figure 13.6 Three types of sexual life cycles. The common feature of all three cycles is the 
alternation of meiosis and fertilization, key events that contribute to genetic variation among offspring. 
The cycles differ in the timing of these two key events. (Small circles are cells; large circles are organisms.)
VISUAL SKILLS For each type of life cycle, indicate whether haploid cells undergo mitosis, 
and if they do, describe the cells that are formed.
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   308 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 310 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 309
may have different versions of genes at corresponding loci; each 
version is called an allele of that gene (see Figure 14.4). For exam-
ple, one chromosome might have an allele for freckles, but the 
homologous chromosome may have an allele for the absence 
of freckles at the same locus. Homologs are not associated with 
each other in any obvious way except during meiosis.
Figure 13.8 describes in detail the stages of the two divi-
sions of meiosis for an animal cell whose diploid number is 6. 
Study this figure thoroughly before going on.
haploid cells that then divide by mitosis and give rise to either 
unicellular descendants or a haploid multicellular adult organ-
ism. Subsequently, the haploid organism carries out further 
mitoses, producing the cells that develop into gametes. The only 
diploid stage found in these species is the single-celled zygote.
Note that either haploid or diploid cells can divide by mito-
sis, depending on the type of life cycle. Only diploid cells, 
however, can undergo meiosis: Haploid cells can’t because 
they already have a single set of chromosomes that cannot be 
further reduced. Though the three types of sexual life cycles 
differ in the timing of meiosis and fertilization, they share a 
fundamental result: genetic variation among offspring.
CONCEPT CHECK 13.2
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS In Figure 13.4, how many DNA mol-
ecules (double helices) are present (see Figure 12.5)? What 
is the haploid number of this cell? Is a set of chromosomes 
haploid or diploid?
2. VISUAL SKILLS In the karyotype in Figure 13.3, how many 
pairs of chromosomes are present? How many sets?
3. Using shoes as an analogy for chromosomes, how would 
you describe the collection of “shoes” in human diploid and 
haploid cells?
4. WHAT IF? A certain eukaryote lives as a unicellular organ-
ism, but during environmental stress, it produces gametes. The 
gametes fuse, and the resulting zygote undergoes meiosis, gen-
erating new single cells. What type of organism could this be?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 13.3
Meiosis reduces the number of 
chromosome sets from diploid  
to haploid
Several steps of meiosis closely resemble corresponding steps 
in mitosis. Meiosis, like mitosis, is preceded by interphase, 
which includes S phase (the duplication of chromosomes). 
However, this is followed by not one but two consecutive 
cell divisions, called meiosis I and meiosis II. These two 
divisions result in four daughter cells (rather than the two 
daughter cells of mitosis), each with only half as many chro-
mosomes as the parent cell—one set, rather than two.
The Stages of Meiosis
The overview of meiosis in Figure 13.7 shows, for a single pair of 
homologous chromosomes in a diploid cell, that both members 
of the pair are duplicated and the copies sorted into four hap-
loid daughter cells. Recall that sister chromatids are two copies 
of one chromosome, closely associated all along their lengths; 
this association is called sister chromatid cohesion. Together, the 
sister chromatids make up one duplicated chromosome (see 
Figure 13.4). In contrast, the two chromosomes of a homolo-
gous pair are individual chromosomes that were inherited from 
each parent. Homologs appear alike in the microscope, but they 
Interphase 
Meiosis I
Meiosis II               
Pair of homologous 
chromosomes in 
diploid parent cell
Chromosomes
are duplicated.
Diploid cell with
duplicated 
chromosomes
Haploid cells with
duplicated chromosomes
Pair of duplicated 
homologous chromosomes
Sister
chromatids
Haploid cells with unduplicated chromosomes
Homologous
chromosomes
are separated. 
Sister chromatids
are separated.
1
2
. Figure 13.7 Overview of meiosis: how meiosis reduces 
chromosome number. After the chromosomes duplicate in 
interphase, the diploid cell divides twice, yielding four haploid daughter 
cells. This overview tracks just one pair of homologous chromosomes, 
which for the sake of simplicity are drawn in the condensed state 
throughout. (They would not normally be condensed during interphase.)
DRAW IT Redraw the cells in this figure using a simple double helix to 
represent each DNA molecule.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Overview of Meiosis
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   309 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 311 ===

310 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Chiasmata
Spindle
microtubules
Pair of
homologous
chromosomes
Centromere
Fragments
of nuclear
envelope
Sister
chromatids
Kinetochore
(at centromere)
Kinetochore
microtubules
Metaphase plate
Sister chromatids
remain together 
Homologous
chromosomes
separate
Duplicated homologous 
chromosomes (red and blue) 
pair up and exchange segments; 
2n = 6 in this example.
Chromosomes line up
by homologous pairs.
The two homologous 
chromosomes of each
pair separate.
Two haploid cells
form; each chromosome
still consists of two
sister chromatids.
Cleavage
furrow
Centrosome
(with centriole pair)
MEIOSIS I: Separates homologous chromosomes 
Prophase I Metaphase I Anaphase I Telophase I
and Cytokinesis 
• Centrosome movement, spindle 
formation, and nuclear envelope 
breakdown occur as in mitosis.      
Chromosomes condense progres-   
sively throughout prophase I.
• During early prophase I, before the 
stage shown above, each chromo-  
some pairs with its homolog,      
aligned gene by gene, and              
crossing over occurs: The DNA 
molecules of nonsister chromatids     
are broken (by proteins) and are 
rejoined to each other.
 
• At the stage shown above, each 
homologous pair has one or more 
X-shaped regions called chiasmata 
(singular, chiasma), where               
crossovers have occurred. 
• Later in prophase I, microtubules from 
one pole or the other attach to the 
kinetochores, one at the centromere   
of each homolog. (The two kineto-
chores on the sister chromatids of a 
homolog are linked together by pro- 
teins and act as a single kinetochore.) 
Microtubules move the homologous 
pairs toward the metaphase plate (see  
the metaphase I diagram).
Prophase I
• Pairs of homologous 
chromosomes are now 
arranged at the metaphase 
plate, with one chromo- 
some of each pair facing 
each pole.
• Each pair has lined up 
independently of other 
pairs. (This arrangement is 
called independent assort-
ment, to be discussed later.)
• Both chromatids of one 
homolog are attached to 
kinetochore microtubules 
from one pole; the chroma-
tids of the other homolog 
are attached to microtubules 
from the opposite pole.
Metaphase I
• Breakdown of proteins that are 
responsible for sister chromatid 
cohesion along chromatid        
arms allows homologs to 
separate.
• The homologs move toward 
opposite poles, guided by the 
spindle apparatus.
• Sister chromatid cohesion 
persists at the centromere, 
causing the two chromatids of 
each chromosome to move as a 
unit toward the same pole.
Anaphase I
• When telophase I begins,  
each half of the cell has            
a complete haploid set of 
duplicated chromosomes. 
Each chromosome is 
composed of two sister 
chromatids; one or both 
chromatids include regions of 
nonsister chromatid DNA.
• Cytokinesis (division of       
the cytoplasm) usually    
occurs simultaneously with 
telophase I, forming two 
haploid daughter cells.
• In animal cells like these, a 
cleavage furrow forms. (In 
plant cells, a cell plate forms.)
• In some species, chromo- 
somes decondense and 
nuclear envelopes form.
• No chromosome duplication 
occurs between meiosis I and 
meiosis II.
Telophase I and
Cytokinesis
. Figure 13.8 Exploring Meiosis in an Animal Cell
 Mastering Biology Video: Meiosis I 
in Sperm Formation
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   310 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 312 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 311
Sister chromatids
separate Haploid daughter cells
forming
During another round of cell division, the sister chromatids finally separate;
four haploid daughter cells result, containing unduplicated chromosomes.
MEIOSIS II: Separates sister chromatids 
Prophase II Metaphase II Anaphase II Telophase II
and Cytokinesis
• A spindle apparatus forms.
• In late prophase II (not shown 
here), chromosomes, each still 
composed of two chromatids 
associated at the centromere, 
are moved by microtubules 
toward the metaphase II plate.
Telophase II and
CytokinesisProphase II 
• The chromosomes are 
positioned at the metaphase 
plate as in mitosis.
• Because of crossing over in 
meiosis I, the two sister 
chromatids of each chromo- 
some are not genetically 
identical.
• The kinetochores of sister 
chromatids are attached to 
microtubules extending from 
opposite poles.
Metaphase II 
• Breakdown of proteins 
holding the sister chromatids 
together at the centromere 
allows the chromatids to 
separate and move toward 
opposite poles. Each chroma-
tid has now become an 
individual chromosome.
Anaphase II 
• Nuclei form, the chromo-
somes begin decondensing, 
and cytokinesis occurs.
• The meiotic division of one 
parent cell produces four 
daughter cells, each with a 
haploid set of (unduplicated) 
chromosomes.
• The four daughter cells are 
genetically distinct from one 
another and from the parent 
cell.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Look at Figure 12.7 and imagine the two 
daughter cells undergoing another round of mitosis, yielding four cells. 
Compare the number of chromosomes in each of those four cells, after 
mitosis, with the number in each cell in Figure 13.8, after meiosis. Explain 
how the process of meiosis results in this difference, even though meiosis 
also includes two cell divisions.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Meiosis 
Animation: Meiosis
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   311 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 313 ===

312 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Crossing Over and Synapsis During 
Prophase I
Prophase I of meiosis is a very busy time. The prophase I cell 
shown in Figure 13.8 is at a point fairly late in prophase I, 
when pairing of homologous chromosomes, crossing over, 
and chromosome condensation have already taken place. 
The sequence of events leading up to that point is shown in 
more detail in Figure 13.9.
After interphase, the chromosomes have been duplicated 
and the sister chromatids are held together by proteins called 
cohesins. 1 Early in prophase I, the two members of a homol-
ogous pair associate loosely along their length. Each gene 
on one homolog is aligned precisely with the corresponding 
allele of that gene on the other homolog. The DNA of two 
nonsister chromatids—one maternal and one paternal—is 
broken by specific proteins at precisely matching points. 
2 Next, the formation of a zipper-like structure called the 
synaptonemal complex holds one homolog tightly to the 
other. 3 During this association, called synapsis, the DNA 
breaks are closed up so that each broken end is joined to the 
corresponding segment of the nonsister chromatid. Thus, a 
paternal chromatid is joined to a piece of maternal chromatid 
beyond the crossover point, and vice versa.
4 These points where crossing over has just occurred become 
visible as chiasmata (singular, chiasma) after the synaptonemal 
complex disassembles and the homologs move slightly apart 
from each other. The homologs remain attached because sister 
chromatids are still held together by sister chromatid cohesion, 
even though some of the DNA may no longer be attached to 
its original chromosomal DNA. At least one crossover per chro-
mosome must occur in order for the homologous pair to stay 
together as it moves to the metaphase I plate, for reasons that 
will be explained shortly.
A Comparison of Mitosis and Meiosis
Figure 13.10 summarizes the key differences between meiosis 
and mitosis in diploid cells. Meiosis produces four cells and 
reduces the number of chromosome sets from two (diploid) 
to one (haploid), whereas mitosis produces two cells and 
conserves the number of chromosome sets. Meiosis produces 
cells that differ genetically from the parent cell and from each 
other, whereas mitosis produces daughter cells that are genet-
ically identical to their parent cell and to each other.
Three events unique to meiosis occur during meiosis I:
1. Synapsis and crossing over . During prophase I, 
 duplicated homologs pair up and crossing over occurs 
as described previously and in Figure 13.9. Synapsis and 
crossing over do not occur during prophase of mitosis.
2. Alignment of homologous pairs at the metaphase 
plate. At metaphase I of meiosis, pairs of homologs are 
positioned at the metaphase plate, rather than individual 
chromosomes, as in metaphase of mitosis.
Crossovers
Synaptonemal 
complex
Paternal
sister
chromatids
Pair of homologous
chromosomes:
Maternal
sister
chromatids
Synaptonemal
complex forming
Sister chromatids
Sister chromatids
Chiasmata
1After interphase, the chromosomes have been dupli-
cated, and sister chromatids are held together by proteins 
called cohesins (purple). Each pair of homologs associate 
along their length. The DNA molecules of two nonsister 
chromatids are broken at precisely corresponding points.
The chromatin of the chromosomes starts to condense.
2A zipper-like protein complex, the synaptonemal complex (green), 
begins to form, attaching one homolog to the other. 
The chromatin continues to condense. 
3The synaptonemal complex is fully formed; the two 
homologs are said to be in synapsis. During synapsis, 
the DNA breaks are closed up when each broken end is 
joined to the corresponding segment of the nonsister 
chromatid, producing crossovers. 
4After the synaptonemal complex disassembles, the homologs 
move slightly apart from each other but remain attached 
because of sister chromatid cohesion, even though some of  
the DNA may no longer be attached to its original chromo- 
some. The points of attachment where crossovers have 
occurred show up as chiasmata. The chromosomes continue 
to condense as they move toward the metaphase plate. 
DNA breaks CentromereDNA breaks
Cohesins
. Figure 13.9 Crossing over and synapsis in prophase I: a 
closer look.
3. Separation of homologs. At anaphase I of meiosis, the 
duplicated chromosomes of each homologous pair move 
toward opposite poles, but the sister chromatids of each 
duplicated chromosome remain attached. In anaphase of 
mitosis, by contrast, sister chromatids separate.
VISUAL SKILLS Label the four DNA breaks in step 2.
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   312 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 314 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 313
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
Daughter cells of meiosis II
Chromosome
duplication
Chromosome
duplication
Sister 
chromatids 
separate 
during 
anaphase II. n
MITOSIS MEIOSIS
Parent cell
(before chromosome duplication)
Mitosis (occurs in both diploid and haploid cells) Meiosis (can only occur in diploid cells)
Occurs during interphase, before mitosis begins Occurs during interphase before meiosis I but not before meiosis II
Enables multicellular animal, fungus, or plant
(gametophyte or sporophyte) to arise from a
single cell; produces cells for growth, repair,
and, in some species, asexual reproduction;
produces gametes in the plant gametophyte
Produces gametes (in animals) or spores (in fungi and in plant 
sporophytes); reduces number of chromosome sets by half and 
introduces genetic variability among the gametes or spores 
Two, each genetically identical to the parent
cell, with the same number of chromosomes
Four, each haploid (n); genetically different from the parent
cell and from each other 
One, including prophase, prometaphase, 
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase
Occurs during prophase I along with crossing over
between nonsister chromatids; resulting chiasmata
hold pairs together due to sister chromatid cohesion
SUMMARY
Property
DNA replication
Role in animals, 
fungi, and plants
Number of
daughter cells
and genetic
composition
Number of
divisions
Does not occurSynapsis of
homologous
chromosomes
n nn
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Anaphase I
Telophase I
Metaphase I
MEIOSIS II
MEIOSIS I
Prophase I
Duplicated chromosome
(two sister chromatids)
Chiasma (site of
crossing over)
Pair of duplicated 
homologs held
together by chiasma
and sister chromatid 
cohesion
Individual
chromosomes
line up at the
metaphase plate.
Pairs of homologous 
chromosomes 
line up at the 
metaphase plate.
Daughter
cells of
meiosis I
Haploid
(n = 3)
Daughter cells
of mitosis
Sister chromatids
separate during
anaphase.
Homologs
separate during 
anaphase I;
sister chromatids
remain attached
at the centromere.
2n2n
2n = 62n = 6
Two, each including prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and
telophase
. Figure 13.10 A comparison of mitosis and meiosis.
DRAW IT Could any other combinations of chromosomes be generated during meiosis II from the 
specific cells shown in telophase I? Explain. (Hint: Draw the cells as they would appear in metaphase II.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   313 3/21/20   1:24 AM

=== SIDE 315 ===

314 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
release of cohesion along sister chromatid arms allows homo-
logs to separate. At anaphase II, the release of sister chromatid 
cohesion at the centromeres allows the sister chromatids to 
separate. Thus, sister chromatid cohesion and crossing over, 
acting together, play an essential role in the lining up of chro-
mosomes by homologous pairs at metaphase I.
Meiosis I reduces the number of chromosome sets: from 
two (diploid) to one (haploid). During the second meiotic 
division, sister chromatids separate, producing four haploid 
daughter cells. The mechanisms for separating sister chro-
matids in meiosis II and mitosis are virtually identical. The 
molecular basis of chromosome behavior during meiosis con-
tinues to be a focus of intense research. In the Scientific Skills 
Exercise, you can work with data that track the amount of 
DNA in cells as they progress through meiosis.
Sister chromatids stay together due to sister chromatid 
cohesion, mediated by cohesin proteins. In mitosis, this 
attachment lasts until the end of metaphase, when enzymes 
cleave the cohesins, freeing the sister chromatids to move to 
opposite poles of the cell. In meiosis, sister chromatid cohe-
sion is released in two steps: cohesion of arms at the start of 
anaphase I and cohesion of centromeres at anaphase II. In 
metaphase I, the two homologs of each pair are held together 
because there is still cohesion between sister chromatid arms 
in regions beyond points of crossing over, where stretches 
of sister chromatids now belong to different chromosomes. 
The combination of crossing over and sister chromatid cohe-
sion along the arms results in the formation of a chiasma. 
Chiasmata hold homologs together as the spindle forms 
for the first meiotic division. At the onset of anaphase I, the 
How Does DNA Content Change as Budding Yeast Cells 
Proceed Through Meiosis? When nutrients are low, cells of the 
budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) exit the mitotic cell cycle 
and enter meiosis. In this exercise, you will track the DNA content 
of a population of yeast cells as they progress through meiosis.
How the Experiment Was Done Researchers grew a culture 
of yeast cells in a nutrient-rich medium and then transferred the 
cells to a nutrient-poor medium to induce meiosis. At different 
times after induction, the DNA content per cell was measured in 
a sample of the cells, and the average DNA content per cell was 
recorded in femtograms (fg; 1  femtogram=1*10-15 gram).
Data from the Experiment
Time After Induction of 
Meiosis (hr)
Average Amount of DNA  
per Cell (fg)
0.0 24.0
1.0 24.0
2.0 40.0
3.0 47.0
4.0 47.5
5.0 48.0
6.0 48.0
7.0 47.5
7.5 25.0
8.0 24.0
9.0 23.5
9.5 14.0
10.0 13.0
11.0 12.5
12.0 12.0
13.0 12.5
14.0 12.0
Making a Line Graph and Converting 
Between Units of Data
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. First, set up your graph. (a) Place the labels for the indepen-
dent and dependent variables on the appropriate axes, fol-
lowed by units of measurement in parentheses. Explain your 
choices. (b) Add tick marks and values for each axis. Explain 
your choices. (For additional information about graphs, see 
the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
2. Because the variable on the x-axis varies continuously, it makes 
sense to plot the data on a line graph (if you are using Excel, 
choose “Scatter”). (a) Plot each data point from the table onto 
the graph. (b) Connect the data points with line segments.
3. Most of the yeast cells in the culture were in G1 of the cell cycle 
before being moved to the nutrient-poor medium. (a) How many 
femtograms of DNA are there in each yeast cell in G1? Estimate 
this value from the data in your graph. (b) How many femtograms 
of DNA should be present in each cell in G2? (See Concept 12.2  
and Figure 12.6.) At the end of meiosis I (MI)? At the end of meio-
sis II (MII)? (See Figure 13.7.) (c) Using these values as a guideline, 
distinguish the different phases by inserting vertical dashed lines 
in the graph between phases and label each phase (G1, S, G2, MI, 
MII). You can figure out where to put the dividing lines based 
on what you know about the DNA content of each phase (see 
Figure 13.7). (d) Think carefully about the point where the line 
at the highest value begins to slope downward. What specific 
point of meiosis does this “corner” represent? What stage(s) 
correspond(s) to the downward sloping line?
4. Given the fact that 1 fg of DNA =9.78*105 base pairs (on 
average), you can convert the amount of DNA per cell to the 
length of DNA in numbers of base pairs. (a) Calculate the number 
of base pairs of DNA in the haploid yeast genome. Express your 
answer in millions of base pairs (Mb), a standard unit for express-
ing genome size. Show your work. (b) How many base pairs per 
minute were synthesized during the S phase of these yeast cells?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Further Reading G. Simchen, Commitment to meiosis: What determines the mode 
of division in budding yeast? BioEssays 31:169–177 (2009).
Scientific Skills Exercise
c Budding yeast cells
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   314 3/21/20   1:25 AM

=== SIDE 316 ===

 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 315
Because each pair of homologous chromosomes is positioned 
independently of the other pairs at metaphase I, the first meiotic 
division results in each pair sorting its maternal and paternal 
homologs into daughter cells independently of every other pair. 
This is called independent assortment. Each daughter cell repre-
sents one outcome of all possible combinations of maternal and 
paternal chromosomes. As shown in Figure 13.11, the number 
of combinations possible for daughter cells formed by meiosis 
of a diploid cell with two pairs of homologous chromosomes 
(n=2) is four: two possible arrangements for the first pair times 
two possible arrangements for the second pair. Note that only 
two of the four combinations of daughter cells shown in the 
figure would result from meiosis of a single diploid cell because 
a single parent cell would have one or the other possible chro-
mosomal arrangement at metaphase I, but not both. However, 
the population of daughter cells resulting from meiosis of a 
large number of diploid cells contains all four types in approxi-
mately equal numbers. In the case of n=3, eight combinations 
12*2*2=232 of chromosomes are possible for daughter 
cells. More generally, the number of possible combinations 
when chromosomes sort independently during meiosis is 2n, 
where n is the haploid number of the species.
In the case of humans (n=23), the number of possible 
combinations of maternal and paternal chromosomes in the 
resulting gametes is 223, or about 8.4 million. Each gamete 
that you produce in your lifetime contains one of roughly 
8.4 million possible combinations of chromosomes. This is 
an underestimate, because it doesn’t take into account cross-
ing over, which we’ll consider next.
Crossing Over
As a consequence of the independent assortment of chro-
mosomes during meiosis, each of us produces a collection 
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare the chromosomes in a cell 
at metaphase of mitosis with those in a cell at metaphase II. 
(See Figures 12.7 and 13.8.)
2. WHAT IF? After the synaptonemal complex disappears, how 
would any pair of homologous chromosomes be associated if 
crossing over did not occur? What effect might this have on 
gamete formation?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 13.3
CONCEPT 13.4
Genetic variation produced in sexual 
life cycles contributes to evolution
How do we account for the genetic variation of the family mem-
bers in Figure 13.1? As you will learn more about in later chap-
ters, mutations are the original source of genetic diversity. These 
changes in an organism’s DNA create the different versions of 
genes, known as alleles. Once these differences arise, reshuffling 
of the alleles during sexual reproduction produces the variation 
that results in each member of a sexually reproducing popula-
tion having a unique combination of traits.
Origins of Genetic Variation Among Offspring
In species that reproduce sexually, the behavior of chromo-
somes during meiosis and fertilization is responsible for most 
of the variation that arises in each generation. Three mecha-
nisms contribute to the genetic variation arising from sexual 
reproduction: independent assortment of chromosomes, cross-
ing over, and random fertilization.
Independent Assortment of Chromosomes
One aspect of sexual reproduction that generates  
genetic variation is the random orientation 
of pairs of homologous chromosomes at 
metaphase of meiosis I. At metaphase I, the 
homologous pairs, each consisting of one 
maternal and one paternal chromosome, are 
situated at the metaphase plate. (Note that the 
terms maternal and paternal refer, respectively, 
to whether the chromosome in question was 
contributed by the mother or the father of 
the individual whose cells are undergoing 
meiosis.) Each pair may orient with either 
its maternal or paternal homolog closer to 
a given pole—its orientation is as random 
as the flip of a coin. Thus, there is a 50% 
chance that a particular daughter cell of 
meiosis I will get the maternal chromo-
some of a certain homologous pair and a 
50% chance that it will get the paternal 
chromosome.
Combination 1 Combination 2 Combination 3 Combination 4
Two equally probable
arrangements of
chromosomes at
metaphase I
Possibility 1 Possibility 2
Metaphase II
Daughter
cells
. Figure 13.11 The independent assortment of homologous  
chromosomes in meiosis.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Genetic Variation from Independent Assortment of Chromosomes
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   315 3/21/20   1:25 AM

=== SIDE 317 ===

316 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
matched during meiosis. New and different combinations of 
alleles may work better than those that previously prevailed.
In a stable environment, though, sexual reproduction 
seems as if it would be less advantageous than asexual repro-
duction, which ensures perpetuation of successful combina-
tions of alleles. Furthermore, sexual reproduction is more 
expensive energetically than asexual reproduction. In spite of 
these apparent disadvantages, sexual reproduction is almost 
universal among animals. Why is this?
The ability of sexual reproduction to generate genetic 
diversity is the most commonly proposed explanation for the 
evolutionary persistence of this process. However, consider the 
unusual case of the bdelloid rotifer (Figure 13.13). It appears 
that this group may not have reproduced sexually for more than 
50 million years of their evolutionary history, a model that has 
been supported by recent analysis of the genetic sequences in 
its genome. Does this mean that genetic diversity is not advan-
tageous in this species? It turns out that bdelloid rotifers are 
of gametes differing greatly in their combinations of 
the chromosomes we inherited from our two parents. 
Figure 13.11 suggests that each chromosome in a gamete 
is exclusively maternal or paternal in origin. In fact, this is 
not the case, because crossing over produces recombinant 
 c h r o m o s o m e s, individual chromosomes that carry genes 
(DNA) from two different parents (Figure 13.12). In meiosis 
in humans, an average of one to three crossover events occurs 
per chromosome pair, depending on the size of the chromo-
somes and the position of their centromeres.
As you learned in Figure 13.9, crossing over produces chro-
mosomes with new combinations of maternal and paternal 
alleles. At metaphase II, chromosomes that contain one or more 
recombinant chromatids can be oriented in two alternative, 
nonequivalent ways with respect to other chromosomes because 
their sister chromatids are no longer identical (see Figure 13.12). 
The different possible arrangements of nonidentical sister chro-
matids during meiosis II further increase the number of genetic 
types of daughter cells that can result from meiosis.
You’ll learn more about crossing over in Concept 15.3. The 
important point for now is that crossing over, by combining 
DNA inherited from two parents into a single chromosome, is 
an important source of genetic variation in sexual life cycles.
Random Fertilization
The random nature of fertilization adds to the genetic varia-
tion arising from meiosis. In humans, each male and female 
gamete represents one of about 8.4 million (223) possible 
chromosome combinations due to independent assortment. 
The fusion of a male gamete with a female gamete during fer-
tilization will produce a zygote with any of about 70 trillion 
(223*223) diploid combinations. If we factor in the variation 
brought about by crossing over, the number of possibilities is 
truly astronomical. You really are unique.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Genetic Variation  
from Random Fertilization
The Evolutionary Significance of Genetic 
Variation Within Populations
EVOLUTION N o w  t h a t  y o u ’ v e  l e a r n e d  h o w  n e w  c o m b i n a-
tions of genes arise among offspring in a sexually reproducing 
population, how does the genetic variation in a population 
relate to evolution? Darwin recognized that a population 
evolves through the differential reproductive success of its 
variant members. On average, those individuals best suited 
to the local environment leave the most offspring, thereby 
transmitting their genes. Thus, natural selection results in the 
accumulation of genetic variations favored in a certain envi-
ronment. As the environment changes, the population may 
survive if, in each generation, at least some of its members can 
cope effectively with the new conditions. Mutations are the 
original source of different alleles, which are then mixed and 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Genetic Variation from 
 Crossing Over
1
2
3
Recombinant
chromosomes
TEM
Nonsister chromatids
held together
during synapsis
Pair of
homologs
Chiasma,
site of
crossing
over
Centromere
In prophase I, synapsis
and crossing over 
occur; then homologs 
move apart slightly.
Chiasmata and
cohesion between 
sister chromatids hold 
homologs together; 
they move to the 
metaphase I plate.
Breakdown of proteins
holding sister chroma-
tid arms together 
allows homologs with 
recombinant chroma-
tids to separate.
Prophase I
of meiosis
Anaphase I
Anaphase II
Daughter
cells
. Figure 13.12 The results of crossing over during meiosis.
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   316 3/21/20   1:25 AM

=== SIDE 318 ===

In this chapter, we have seen how sexual reproduction 
greatly increases the genetic variation present in a popula-
tion. Although Darwin realized that heritable variation is 
what makes evolution possible, he could not explain why 
offspring resemble—but are not identical to—their parents. 
Ironically, Gregor Mendel, a contemporary of Darwin, pub-
lished a theory of inheritance that helps explain genetic 
variation, but his discoveries had no impact on biologists 
until 1900, more than 15 years after Darwin (1809–1882) and 
Mendel (1822–1884) had died. In the next chapter, you’ll 
learn how Mendel discovered the basic rules governing the 
inheritance of specific traits.
an exception to the “rule” 
that sex alone generates 
genetic diversity: Bdelloids 
have mechanisms other than 
sexual reproduction for gen-
erating genetic diversity. For 
example, they live in envi-
ronments that can dry up for 
long periods of time, during 
which they can enter a state of 
suspended animation. In this 
state, their cell membranes 
may crack in places, allow-
ing entry of DNA from other 
rotifer species and even from 
more distantly related species. Evidence suggests that this foreign 
DNA can become incorporated into the genome of the bdel-
loid, leading to increased genetic diversity. In fact, the genomic 
analysis shows that bdelloid rotifers pick up non-bdelloid DNA 
at a much higher rate than most other species pick up foreign 
DNA. The conclusion that bdelloid rotifers have developed other 
ways of achieving genetic diversity supports the idea that genetic 
diversity is advantageous, but points out as well that sexual 
reproduction is not the only way of generating such diversity.
200 om
. Figure 13.13 A bdelloid 
rotifer, an animal that 
reproduces only asexually.
CONCEPT CHECK 13.4
1. What would be the source of genetic diversity in the gam-
etes if chromosomes were not assorted independently?
2. The diploid number for fruit flies is 8, and the diploid num-
ber for grasshoppers is 46. If no crossing over took place, 
would the genetic variation among offspring from a given 
pair of parents be greater in fruit flies or grasshoppers? 
Explain.
3. WHAT IF? If all chromosomes in a gamete were shortened to 
half their lengths, how would the genetic diversity resulting 
from crossing over get affected? 
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
a diploid (2n=46) single-celled zygote, which develops into a 
multicellular organism by mitosis.
• Sexual life cycles differ in the timing of meiosis relative to fertil-
ization and in the point(s) of the cycle at which a multicellular 
organism is produced by mitosis.
? Compare and contrast the life cycles of animals and plants.
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 13.1
Offspring acquire genes from parents by inheriting 
chromosomes (pp. 305–306)
• Each gene in an organism’s DNA exists at a specific locus on a 
certain chromosome.
• In asexual reproduction, a single parent produces genetically 
identical offspring by mitosis. Sexual reproduction combines 
genes from two parents, leading to genetically diverse offspring.
? Explain why human offspring resemble their parents but are not 
identical to them.
13 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 13.2
Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles 
(pp. 306–309)
• Normal human somatic cells are diploid. They have 46 chro-
mosomes made up of two sets of 23 chromosomes, one set from 
each parent. Human diploid cells have 22 pairs of homologs 
that are autosomes, and one pair of sex chromosomes; the 
latter typically determines whether the person is female (XX) or 
male (XY).
• In humans, ovaries and testes produce haploid gametes by 
meiosis, each gamete containing a single set of 23 chromosomes 
(n=23). During fertilization, an egg and sperm unite, forming 
CONCEPT 13.3
Meiosis reduces the number of chromosome sets from 
diploid to haploid (pp. 309–315)
• The two cell divisions of meiosis, meiosis I and meiosis II, pro-
duce four haploid daughter cells. The number of chromosome sets 
is reduced from two (diploid) to one (haploid) during meiosis I.
• Meiosis is distinguished from mitosis by three events of meiosis I:
Prophase I: Each pair of homologous chromosomes 
undergoes synapsis and crossing over between 
nonsister chromatids with the subsequent appearance 
of chiasmata.
Metaphase I: Chromosomes line up as homologous 
pairs on the metaphase plate.
Anaphase I: Homologs separate from each other; 
sister chromatids remain joined at the centromere.
 CHAPTER 13  Sexual Life Cycles and Meiosis 317
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   317 3/21/20   1:25 AM

=== SIDE 319 ===

• Meiosis II separates the sister chromatids.
• Sister chromatid cohesion and crossing over allow chiasmata to hold 
homologs together until anaphase I. Cohesins are cleaved along the 
arms at anaphase I, allowing homologs to separate, and at the cen-
tromeres in anaphase II, releasing sister chromatids from each other.
? In prophase I, homologous chromosomes pair up and undergo 
synapsis and crossing over. Can this also occur during prophase II? Explain.
CONCEPT 13.4
Genetic variation produced in sexual life cycles 
contributes to evolution (pp. 315–317)
• Three events in sexual reproduction contribute to genetic varia-
tion in a population: independent assortment of chromosomes 
during meiosis I, crossing over during meiosis I, and random fertil-
ization of egg cells by sperm. During crossing over, DNA of nonsis-
ter chromatids in a homologous pair is broken and rejoined.
• Genetic variation is the raw material for evolution by natural selec-
tion. Mutations are the original source of this variation; recombi-
nation of variant genes generates additional genetic diversity.
? Explain how three processes unique to sexual reproduction generate 
a great deal of genetic variation.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
F
H
318 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
be the evolutionary significance of the switch from asexual 
to sexual reproduction that occurs in some species when the 
environment becomes unfavorable.
9. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY During the generation of gametes, 
cell 1 of an organism with three chromosomes undergoes an 
abnormal separation of one homologous chromosome at the 
time of the first meiotic division. The second meiotic division 
is normal. On the other hand, cell 2 undergoes a normal first 
meiotic division, but one of the daughter cells undergoes an 
abnormal separation of one sister chromatid at the time of 
the second meiotic division. What will be the chromosomal 
distribution in the gametes obtained from cell 1 and cell 2 after 
meiosis?
10. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION The continuity 
of life is based on heritable information in the form of 
DNA. In a short essay (100–150 words), explain how 
chromosome behavior during sexual reproduction 
in animals ensures perpetuation of parental traits in 
offspring and, at the same time, genetic variation 
among offspring.
11. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
The Cavendish banana, the world’s most popular 
fruit, is currently threatened by extinction due to a 
fungus. This banana variety is “triploid” (3n, with three 
sets of chromosomes) and can only reproduce through 
cloning by cultivators. Given what you know about meiosis, 
explain how the banana’s triploid number accounts for 
its inability to form normal gametes. Considering genetic 
diversity, discuss how the absence of sexual reproduction 
might make this domesticated species vulnerable to 
infectious agents.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
6. DRAW IT The diagram shows 
a cell in meiosis.
(a) Label the appropriate 
structures with these 
terms: chromosome (label 
as duplicated or undu-
plicated), centromere, 
kin etochore, sister chro-
matids, nonsister chroma-
tids, homologous pair (use 
a bracket when labeling), 
homolog (label each one), 
chiasma, sister chroma-
tid cohesion, and gene loci.  
Circle and label the alleles of the F gene.
(b)  Precisely describe the makeup of a haploid set and a diploid 
set in this cell.
(c) Identify the stage of meiosis shown.
7. What would be the consequences of a mutation in the enzyme 
that cleaves cohesins in the first and second meiotic divisions? 
8. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Many species can reproduce 
either asexually or sexually. Explain what you think might 
URRY1637_12_GE_C13_PRF.indd   318 3/21/20   1:25 AM

=== SIDE 320 ===

319
Figure 14.1 Flower color was one of the many characteristics of pea plants studied 
by Gregor Mendel. By breeding pea plants over many generations and carefully 
counting the types of offspring, Mendel developed a theory of inheritance that is 
the basis of modern genetics.
Study Tip
Solving genetics problems: In Figure 
14.5, you’ll learn how to predict the 
offspring of a genetic cross with a Punnett 
square, like the example shown below. 
For crosses shown in other figures, cover 
up the Punnett square and draw your 
own. Also, check out the Tips for Genetics 
Problems at the end of the chapter.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 14
• Figure 14.4 Walkthrough: Alleles, 
Alternative Versions of a Gene
• Animation: Cross of One Character in 
“MendAliens”
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Mendel’s Law of Independent 
Assortment
• Tutorial: Pedigree Analysis: Galactosemia
14.1 Mendel used the scientific  
approach to identify two laws  
of inheritance p. 320
14.2 Probability laws govern Mendelian 
inheritance p. 326
14.3 Inheritance patterns are often more 
complex than predicted by simple 
Mendelian genetics p. 328
14.4 Many human traits follow 
Mendelian patterns of 
inheritance p. 334
KEY CONCEPTS
Mendelian Genetics14
Eggs
Sperm
PP
P
P
p
p
Pp
Pp pp
How are traits, such as the purple or white color of 
ﬂowers, transmitted from parents to offspring?
Alternative versions of a gene (alleles) account for different traits.
Each parent cell has 
two alleles for each 
character, such as flower 
color. Here, the alleles are 
identical in each parent.
The two alleles 
segregate (separate) 
during gamete 
formation, 
ending up in 
different gametes 
(Law of Segregation).
Offspring inherit one allele from 
each parent. When the two alleles are 
different, one allele (here, purple) 
determines the appearance.
When the offspring reproduces, 
the same principle applies:
The alleles segregate, 
ending up in different 
gametes.
Allele
for purple
flowers
Parental cells that
will form gametes
Gamete
formation
Gamete
formation
Gamete
formation
Allele
for white
flowers
Sperm
Sperm or eggs
Eggs
Purple-flowered
offspring
Paternal chromosome Maternal chromosome
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   319 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 321 ===

320 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
plants (Figure 14.2). Each pea flower has both pollen-producing 
organs (stamens) and an egg-bearing organ (carpel). In nature, 
pea plants usually self-fertilize: Pollen grains from the stamens 
land on the carpel of the same flower, and sperm released from 
the pollen grains fertilize eggs present in the carpel.* To achieve 
Mendel used the scientific 
approach to identify two laws  
of inheritance
Modern genetics began during the mid-1800s with a monk 
named Gregor Mendel, who discovered the basic principles 
of heredity by breeding garden peas in carefully planned 
experiments. As we retrace his work, you will recognize the 
key elements of the scientific process that were introduced in 
Concept 1.3.
Mendel’s Experimental, Quantitative 
Approach
Mendel grew up on his parents’ small farm in a region of 
Austria that is now part of the Czech Republic. In this agri-
cultural area, Mendel received agricultural training in school 
along with a basic education. As an adolescent, Mendel over-
came financial hardship and illness to excel in high school 
and, later, at the Olmutz Philosophical Institute.
In 1843, at the age of 21, Mendel entered an Augustinian 
monastery, a reasonable choice at that time for someone 
who valued the life of the mind. He considered becoming 
a teacher but failed the necessary examination. In 1851, he 
left the monastery to pursue two years of study in physics 
and chemistry at the University of Vienna. These were very 
important years for Mendel’s development as a scientist, in 
large part due to the strong influence of two professors. One 
was the physicist Christian Doppler, who encouraged his stu-
dents to learn science through experimentation and trained 
Mendel to use mathematics to help explain natural phe-
nomena. The other was a botanist named Franz Unger, who 
aroused Mendel’s interest in the causes of variation in plants.
After attending university, Mendel returned to the monas-
tery and was assigned to teach at a local school, where several 
other instructors were enthusiastic about scientific research. 
In addition, his fellow monks shared a long-standing fascina-
tion with the breeding of plants. Around 1857, Mendel began 
breeding garden peas in the abbey garden to study inheritance. 
Although the question of heredity had long been a focus of 
curiosity at the monastery, Mendel’s fresh approach allowed 
him to deduce principles that had remained elusive to others.
One reason Mendel probably chose to work with peas is 
that there are many varieties. For example, one variety has 
purple flowers, while another variety has white flowers. A 
heritable feature that varies among individuals, such as flower 
color, is called a character. Each variant for a character, such 
as purple or white color for flowers, is called a trait.
Other advantages of using peas are their short generation 
time and the large number of offspring from each mating. 
Furthermore, Mendel could strictly control mating between 
CONCEPT 14.1
*As you learned in Figure 13.6b, meiosis in plants produces spores, not gametes. 
In flowering plants like the pea, each spore develops into a microscopic haploid 
gametophyte that contains only a few cells and is located on the parent plant. 
The gametophyte produces sperm, in pollen grains, and eggs, in the carpel. 
For simplicity, we will not include the gametophyte stage in our discussion of 
fertilization in plants.
Application By crossing, or mating, two true-breeding 
varieties of an organism, scientists can study patterns of 
inheritance. In this example, Mendel crossed pea plants  
that varied in flower color.
Technique
Results When pollen from a white flower was transferred 
to a purple flower, the first-generation hybrids all had 
purple flowers. The result was the same for the reciprocal 
cross, which involved the transfer of pollen from purple 
flowers to white flowers.
. Figure 14.2 Research Method
Crossing Pea Plants
Waited for pollinated 
carpel to mature 
into pod
3
Planted 
seeds from 
pod
4
Transferred sperm-
bearing pollen from 
stamens of white 
flower to egg-
bearing carpel of 
purple flower
2
Parental
generation
(P)
Carpel
Removed stamens
from purple flower
1
Stamens
First filial 
generation 
offspring 
(F1)
Examined 
offspring: 
all had 
purple 
flowers
5
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   320 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 322 ===

322 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Mendel’s Model
Mendel developed a model to explain the 3:1 inheritance pat-
tern that he consistently observed among the F2 offspring in 
his pea experiments. We’ll now explore four related concepts 
making up Mendel’s model, the fourth of which is the law of 
segregation.
First, alternative versions of genes account for variations in 
inherited characters. The gene for flower color in pea plants, 
for example, exists in two versions, one for purple flowers 
and the other for white flowers. These alternative versions of 
a gene are called alleles. Today, we can relate this concept to 
chromosomes and DNA. As shown in Figure 14.4, each gene 
is a sequence of nucleotides at a specific place, or locus, along 
a particular chromosome. The DNA at that locus, however, 
can vary slightly in its nucleotide sequence. This variation in 
information content can affect the function of the encoded 
protein and thus an inherited character of the organism. The 
purple-flower allele and the white-flower allele are two DNA 
sequence variations possible at the flower-color locus on a 
pea plant’s chromosomes. The purple-flower allele sequence 
allows synthesis of purple pigment, and the white-flower 
allele sequence does not.
Second, for each character, an organism inherits two versions 
(that is, two alleles) of a gene, one from each parent. Remarkably, 
Mendel made this deduction without knowing about the role, 
or even the existence, of chromosomes. Each somatic cell in a 
diploid organism has two sets of chromosomes, one set inher-
ited from each parent (see Figure 13.4). Thus, a genetic locus 
is actually represented twice in a diploid cell, once on each 
homolog of a specific pair of chromosomes. The two alleles 
at a particular locus may be identical, as in the true-breeding 
plants of Mendel’s P generation. Or the alleles may differ, as 
in the F1 hybrids (see Figure 14.4).
Third, if the two alleles at a locus differ, then one, the 
dominant allele, determines the organism’s appearance; 
the other, the recessive allele, has no noticeable effect on the 
organism’s appearance. Accordingly, Mendel’s F1 plants had 
purple flowers because the allele for that trait is dominant 
and the allele for white flowers is recessive.
The fourth and final part of Mendel’s model, the law of 
segregation, states that the two alleles for a heritable character 
segregate (in other words, separate from each other) during gam-
ete formation and end up in different gametes. Thus, an egg or a 
sperm gets only one of the two alleles that are present in the 
diploid cells of the organism making the gamete. In terms of 
chromosomes, this segregation corresponds to the distribu-
tion of copies of the two members of a pair of homologous 
chromosomes to different gametes in meiosis (see Figure 13.7). 
Note that if an organism has identical alleles for a particular 
character, then that allele is present in all gametes. Because 
it is the only allele that can be passed on to offspring when 
the plant self-pollinates, the offspring always look the same 
as their parents in regard to that characteristic; this explains 
why these plants are true-breeding. But if different alleles are 
when the purple-flower factor was present. In Mendel’s termi-
nology, purple flower color is a dominant trait, and white flower 
color is a recessive trait. The reappearance of  white-flowered 
plants in the F2 generation was evidence that the heritable fac-
tor causing white flowers had not been diluted or destroyed by 
coexisting with the purple-flower factor in the F1 hybrids.
Mendel observed the same pattern of inheritance in six 
other characters, each represented by two distinctly differ-
ent traits (Table 14.1). For example, when Mendel crossed a 
 true-breeding variety that produced smooth, round pea seeds 
with one that produced wrinkled seeds, all the F1 hybrids pro-
duced round seeds; this is the dominant trait for seed shape. 
In the F2 generation, approximately 75% of the seeds were 
round and 25% were wrinkled—a 3:1 ratio, as in Figure 14.3. 
Now let’s see how Mendel deduced the law of segregation 
from his experimental results. In the discussion that follows, 
we will use modern terms instead of some of the terms used 
by Mendel. (For example, we’ll use “gene” instead of Mendel’s 
“heritable factor.”)
Character
Dominant 
Trait *
Recessive 
Trait
F2 
Generation 
Dominant: 
Recessive Ratio
Flower color Purple * White 705:224 3.15:1
Seed color Yellow * Green 6,022:2,001 3.01:1
Seed shape Round * Wrinkled 5,474:1,850 2.96:1
Pod color Green * Yellow 428:152 2.82:1
Pod shape Inflated *Constricted 882:299 2.95:1
Flower 
position
Axial * Terminal 651:207 3.14:1
Stem length Tall * Dwarf 787:277 2.84:1
Table 14.1  T h e  R e s u l t s  o f  M e n d e l ’ s  F1 Crosses for Seven 
Characters in Pea Plants
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   322 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 323 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 321
planted their seeds, the white-flower trait reappeared in the F2 
generation. The blending hypothesis is also inconsistent with 
this reappearance of traits after they’ve skipped a generation.
Mendel used very large sample sizes and kept accurate 
records of his results: 705 of the F2 plants had purple flowers, 
and 224 had white flowers. These data fit a ratio of approxi-
mately three purple to one white (Figure 14.3). Mendel 
reasoned that the heritable factor for white flowers did not 
disappear in the F1 plants but was somehow hidden, or masked, 
cross-pollination of two plants, Mendel removed the imma-
ture stamens of a plant before they produced pollen and then 
dusted pollen from another plant onto the altered flowers 
(see Figure 14.2). Each resulting zygote then developed into a 
plant embryo encased in a seed (a pea). His method allowed 
Mendel to always be sure of the parentage of new seeds.
Mendel chose to track only those characters that occurred 
in two distinct, alternative forms, such as purple or white 
flower color. He also made sure that he started his experi-
ments with varieties that were true-breeding—that is, over 
many generations of self-pollination, these plants had pro-
duced only the same variety as the parent plant. For example, 
a plant with purple flowers is true-breeding if the seeds pro-
duced by self-pollination in successive generations all give 
rise to plants that also have purple flowers.
In a typical breeding experiment, Mendel cross-pollinated 
two contrasting, true-breeding pea varieties—for example, 
purple-flowered plants and white-flowered plants (see 
Figure 14.2). This mating, or crossing, of two true-breeding 
varieties is called hybridization. The true-breeding par-
ents are referred to as the P generation (parental genera-
tion), and their hybrid offspring are the F1 generation 
(first filial generation, the word filial from the Latin word 
for “son”). Allowing these F1 hybrids to self-pollinate 
(or to  cross-pollinate with other F1 hybrids) produces an 
F2 generation (second filial generation). Mendel usually fol-
lowed traits for at least the P, F1, and F2 generations. Had he 
stopped his experiments with the F1 generation, the basic pat-
terns of inheritance would have eluded him. Mendel’s quan-
titative analysis of the F2 plants from thousands of genetic 
crosses like these allowed him to deduce two fundamental 
principles of heredity, now called the law of segregation and 
the law of independent assortment.
The Law of Segregation
The explanation of heredity most widely in favor during the 
1800s was the “blending” hypothesis, the idea that genetic 
material contributed by the two parents mixes just as blue and 
yellow paints blend to make green. This hypothesis predicts that 
over many generations, a freely mating population will give rise 
to a uniform population of individuals, something we don’t see.
If the blending model were correct, the F1 hybrids from 
Mendel’s cross between purple-flowered and white-flowered 
pea plants would have been pale purple flowers, a trait 
intermediate between those of the P generation. Notice 
in Figure 14.2 that the experiment produced a very dif-
ferent result: All the F1 offspring had flowers of the same 
color as the  purple-flowered parents. What happened to 
the  white-flowered plants’ genetic contribution to the 
hybrids? If it were lost, then the F1 plants could produce only 
 purple-flowered offspring in the F2 generation. But when 
Mendel allowed the F1 plants to self- or cross-pollinate and 
/uni25BC Figure 14.3 Inquiry
When F1 hybrid pea plants self- or cross-pollinate, 
which traits appear in the F2 generation?
Experiment Mendel crossed true-breeding purple-flowered 
plants and white-flowered plants (crosses are symbolized by *). 
The resulting F1 hybrids were allowed to self-pollinate or were 
cross-pollinated with other F1 hybrids. The F2 generation plants 
were then observed for flower color.
P Generation
F1 Generation
F2 Generation
Purple 
flowers
White 
flowers
All plants had purple flowers
Self- or cross-pollination
705 purple-flowered
plants
224 white-flowered
plants
3
(hybrids)
(true-breeding
parents)
Results Both purple-flowered and white-flowered plants 
appeared in the F2 generation, in a ratio of approximately 3:1.
Conclusion The “heritable factor” for the recessive 
trait (white flowers) had not been destroyed, deleted, or 
“blended” in the F1 generation but was merely masked by 
the presence of the factor for purple flowers, which is the 
dominant trait.
Data from G. Mendel, Experiments in plant hybridization, Proceedings of the 
Natural History Society of Brünn 4:3–47 (1866).
WHAT IF? If you mated two purple-flowered plants from the 
P generation, what ratio of traits would you expect to observe in the 
offspring? Explain. What might Mendel have concluded if he stopped 
his experiment after the F1 generation?
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   321 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 324 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 323
present, as in the F1 hybrids, then 50% of 
the gametes receive the dominant allele 
and 50% receive the recessive allele.
Does Mendel’s segregation model 
account for the 3:1 ratio he observed 
in the F2 generation of his numerous 
crosses? For the flower-color character, 
the model predicts that the two different 
alleles present in an F1 individual will 
segregate into gametes such that half 
the gametes will have the purple-flower 
allele and half will have the white-flower 
allele. During self-pollination, gametes 
of each class unite randomly. An egg 
with a purple-flower allele has an equal 
chance of being fertilized by a sperm 
with a purple-flower allele or by a sperm 
with a white-flower allele. Since the same 
is true for an egg with a white-flower 
allele, there are four equally likely com-
binations of sperm and egg. Figure 14.5 
illustrates these combinations using a 
Punnett square, a handy diagram-
matic device for predicting the allele 
composition of offspring from a cross 
between individuals of known genetic 
makeup. Notice that we use a capital let-
ter to symbolize a dominant allele and a 
lowercase letter for a recessive allele. In 
our example, P is the purple-flower allele, 
and p is the white-flower allele; it is often 
useful as well to be able to refer to the 
gene itself as the P>p gene.
In the F2 offspring, what color will 
the flowers be? One-fourth of the 
T
A
T
A
T
A
G
C
G
C
A
T
A
T
A
T
C
G
C
G
T
A
T
A
T
A
G
C
G
C
A
T
A
T
A
T
A
T
C
G
Allele for
white flowers
Allele for
purple flowers
Locus for flower-color gene
Pair of 
homologous
chromosomes
DNA with nucleotide
sequence CTAAATCGGT
DNA with nucleotide
sequence ATAAATCGGT
This DNA sequence results in the 
absence of the enzyme.
Through a series of 
steps, this DNA sequence 
results in production of an 
enzyme that helps synthesize 
purple pigment.
One 
purple-flower 
allele results in 
sufficient 
pigment for 
purple flowers. 
Enzyme
c Figure 14.4 Alleles, 
alternative versions of a 
gene. This diagram shows 
a pair of homologous 
chromosomes in an F1 hybrid 
pea plant, with the actual 
DNA sequence from the 
flower-color allele of each 
chromosome. The paternally 
inherited chromosome 
(blue) has an allele for purple 
flowers, which codes for a 
protein that indirectly controls 
synthesis of purple pigment. 
The maternally inherited 
chromosome (red) has an 
allele for white flowers, 
which results in no functional 
protein being made.
 Mastering Biology  
Figure Walkthrough
PP Pp
ppPp
Purple flowers
PP
White flowers
pp
P
Appearance:
Genetic makeup:
Gametes:
Appearance:
Genetic makeup:
Gametes:
Purple flowers
Pp
p
p
Eggs from
F1 (Pp) plant
Sperm from
F1 (Pp) plant
P p
p
P
P
p
P
3 : 1
Gametes (circles) each contain only 
one allele for the flower-color gene. 
In this case, every gamete produced by 
a given parent has the same allele.
Each true-breeding plant of the 
parental generation has two identical
alleles, denoted as either PP or pp.
This box, a Punnett square, shows 
all possible combinations of alleles 
in offspring that result from an 
F1 3 F1 (Pp 3 Pp) cross. Each square 
represents an equally probable product 
of fertilization. For example, the bottom
left box shows the genetic combination
resulting from a       egg fertilized by
a      sperm.
Union of parental gametes produces 
F1 hybrids having a Pp combination. 
Because the purple-flower allele is 
dominant, all these hybrids have purple 
flowers.
Random combination of the gametes
results in the 3:1 ratio that Mendel
observed in the F2 generation.
12 12
F2 Generation
When the hybrid plants produce
gametes, the two alleles segregate. 
Half of the gametes receive the P allele 
and the other half the p allele.
F1 Generation
P Generation 3
. Figure 14.5 Mendel’s law of segregation. This diagram shows the genetic makeup of the 
generations in Figure 14.3. It illustrates Mendel’s model for inheritance of the alleles of a single 
gene. Each plant has two alleles for the gene controlling flower color, one allele inherited from each 
of the plant’s parents. To construct a Punnett square that predicts the F2 generation offspring, we 
list all the possible gametes from one parent (here, the F1 female) along the left side of the square 
and all the possible gametes from the other parent (here, the F1 male) along the top. The boxes 
represent the offspring resulting from all the possible unions of male and female gametes.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Mendel’s Cross of One Character: Flower Color 
Animation: Simplified Crosses of One Character in Humans  
Animation: Cross of One Character in “MendAliens”
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   323 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 325 ===

324 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
plants have inherited two purple-flower alleles; clearly, these 
plants will have purple flowers. One-half of the F2 offspring 
have inherited one purple-flower allele and one white-flower 
allele; these plants will also have purple flowers, the domi-
nant trait. Finally, one-fourth of the F2 plants have inherited 
two white-flower alleles and will express the recessive trait. 
Thus, Mendel’s model accounts for the 3:1 ratio of traits that 
he observed in the F2 generation.
Useful Genetic Vocabulary
An organism that has a pair of identical alleles for a gene 
encoding a character is called a homozygote and is said to 
be homozygous for that gene. In the parental generation 
in Figure 14.5, the purple-flowered pea plant is homozygous 
for the dominant allele (PP), while the white plant is homo-
zygous for the recessive allele (pp). Homozygous plants 
“breed true” because all of their gametes contain the same 
allele—either P or p in this example. If we cross dominant 
homozygotes with recessive homozygotes, every offspring 
will have two different alleles—Pp in the case of the F1 
hybrids of our flower-color experiment (see Figure 14.5). An 
organism that has two different alleles for a gene is called 
a heterozygote and is said to be heterozygous for that 
gene. Unlike homozygotes, heterozygotes produce gametes 
with different alleles, so they are not true-breeding. For 
example, P- and p-containing gametes are both produced by 
our F1 hybrids. Self-pollination of the F1 hybrids thus pro-
duces both purple-flowered and white-flowered offspring.
Because of the different effects of dominant and recessive 
alleles, an organism’s traits do not always reveal its genetic 
composition. Therefore, we distinguish between an organ-
ism’s appearance or observable traits, called its phenotype, 
and its genetic makeup, its genotype. As shown in Figure 
14.5 for the case of flower color in pea plants, PP and Pp plants 
have the same phenotype (purple flowers) but different geno-
types. Figure 14.6 reviews these terms. Note that the term 
phenotype refers not only to traits that relate directly to physi-
cal appearance but also to physiological traits. For example, 
one pea variety lacks the normal ability to  self-pollinate, 
which is a phenotypic trait (called non-self-pollination).
The Testcross
Given a purple-flowered pea plant, we cannot tell if it is 
homozygous (PP) or heterozygous (Pp) because both geno-
types result in the same purple phenotype. To determine 
the genotype, we can cross this plant with a white-flowered 
plant (pp), which will make only gametes with the reces-
sive allele (p). The allele in the gamete contributed by the 
purple-flowered plant of unknown genotype will therefore 
determine the appearance of the offspring (Figure 14.7). If 
all the offspring of the cross have purple flowers, then the 
purple-flowered mystery plant must be homozygous for the 
dominant allele, because a PP*pp cross produces all Pp 
offspring. But if both the purple and the white phenotypes 
GenotypePhenotype
Purple
Purple
Purple
White
Ratio 3 purple : 1 white
1
3
PP 
(homozygous)
Pp 
(heterozygous)
Pp 
(heterozygous)
pp 
(homozygous)
Ratio 1 PP : 2 Pp : 1 pp
1
2
1
. Figure 14.6 Phenotype versus genotype. Grouping F2 
offspring from a cross for flower color according to phenotype results 
in the typical 3:1 phenotypic ratio. In terms of genotype, however, 
there are actually two categories of purple-flowered plants, PP 
(homozygous) and Pp (heterozygous), giving a 1:2:1 genotypic ratio.
appear among the offspring, then the purple-flowered par-
ent must be heterozygous. The offspring of a Pp*pp cross 
will be expected to have a 1:1 phenotypic ratio. Breeding an 
organism of unknown genotype with a recessive homozy-
gote is called a testcross because it can reveal the genotype 
of that organism. The testcross was devised by Mendel and 
continues to be used by geneticists.
The Law of Independent Assortment
Mendel derived the law of segregation from experiments 
in which he followed only a single character, such as 
flower color. All the F1 progeny produced in his crosses of 
 true-breeding parents were monohybrids, meaning that 
they were heterozygous for the one particular character being 
followed in the cross. We refer to a cross between such hetero-
zygotes as a monohybrid cross.
Mendel worked out the second law of inheritance by fol-
lowing two characters at the same time, such as seed color and 
seed shape. Seeds (peas) may be either yellow or green. They 
also may be either round (smooth) or wrinkled. From single-
character crosses, Mendel knew that the allele for yellow 
seeds is dominant (Y), and the allele for green seeds is reces-
sive (y). For the seed-shape character, the allele for round is 
dominant (R), and the allele for wrinkled is recessive (r).
Imagine crossing two true-breeding pea varieties that differ 
in both of these characters—a cross between a plant with yel-
low round seeds (YYRR) and a plant with green wrinkled seeds 
(yyrr). The F1 plants will be dihybrids, individuals heterozy-
gous for the two characters being followed in the cross (YyRr). 
But are these two characters transmitted from parents to 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   324 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 326 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 325
Application An organism that shows a dominant trait in 
its phenotype, such as purple flowers in pea plants, can be 
either homozygous for the dominant allele or heterozygous. 
To determine the organism’s genotype, geneticists can per-
form a testcross.
Technique In a testcross, the individual with the unknown 
genotype is crossed with a homozygous individual express-
ing the recessive trait (white flowers in this example), and 
Punnett squares are used to predict the possible outcomes.
Dominant phenotype,
unknown genotype:
PP or Pp?
or
Predictions
Recessive phenotype,
known genotype:
pp
If purple-flowered
parent is PP:
If purple-flowered
parent is Pp:
Sperm
Eggs Eggs
Sperm
3
Pp Pp
Pp Pp
Pp
P
Pp
pp pp
P
P p
pp pp
Results M a t c h i n g  t h e  r e s u l t s  t o  e i t h e r  p r e d i c t i o n  i d e n t i-
fies the unknown parental genotype (either PP or Pp in 
this example). In this testcross, we transferred pollen from 
a white-flowered plant to the carpels of a purple-flowered 
plant; the opposite (reciprocal) cross would have led to the 
same results.
or
All offspring purple offspring purple and
offspring white12
12
  Mastering Biology Animation: Testcross in “MendAliens”
/uni25BC Figure 14.7 Research Method
The Testcross
offspring as a package? That is, will the Y and R alleles always 
stay together, generation after generation? Or are seed color 
and seed shape inherited independently? Figure 14.8 shows 
how a dihybrid cross, a cross between F1 dihybrids, can 
determine which of these two hypotheses is correct.
The F1 plants, of genotype YyRr, exhibit both dominant 
phenotypes, yellow seeds with round shapes, no matter 
which hypothesis is correct. The key step in the experiment 
is to see what happens when F1 plants self-pollinate and pro-
duce F2 offspring. If the hybrids must transmit their alleles in 
the same combinations in which the alleles were inherited 
from the P generation, then the F1 hybrids will produce only 
two classes of gametes: YR and yr. As shown on the left side of 
Figure 14.8, this “dependent assortment” hypothesis predicts 
that the phenotypic ratio of the F2 generation will be 3:1, just 
as in a monohybrid cross:
34 14
The alternative hypothesis is that the two pairs of alleles 
segregate independently of each other. In other words, genes 
are packaged into gametes in all possible allelic combina-
tions, as long as each gamete has one allele for each gene 
(see Figure 13.11). In our example, an F1 plant will produce 
four classes of gametes in equal quantities: YR, Yr, yR, and yr. 
If sperm of the four classes fertilize eggs of the four classes, 
there will be 16 (4 * 4) equally probable ways in which the 
alleles can combine in the F2 generation, as shown on the 
right side of Figure 14.8. These combinations result in four 
phenotypic categories with a ratio of 9:3:3:1 (9 yellow round 
to 3 green round to 3 yellow wrinkled to 1 green wrinkled):
916 316 316 116
When Mendel did the experiment and classified the 
F2 offspring, his results were close to the predicted 9:3:3:1 
phenotypic ratio, supporting the hypothesis that the alleles 
for one gene—the gene for seed color, for example—segregate 
into gametes independently of the alleles of any other gene, 
such as the gene for seed shape.
Mendel tested his seven pea characters in various dihy-
brid combinations and always observed a 9:3:3:1 pheno-
typic ratio in the F2 generation. Is this consistent with the 
3:1 phenotypic ratio seen for the monohybrid cross shown 
in Figure 14.5? To answer this question, count the number 
of yellow and green peas, ignoring shape, and calculate 
the ratio. The results of Mendel’s dihybrid experiments are 
the basis for what we now call the law of independent 
assortment, which states that two or more genes assort 
 i n d e p e n d e n t l y — t h a t  i s ,  e a c h  p a i r  o f  a l l e l e s  s e g r e g a t e s  i n d e p e n-
dently of any other pair of alleles—during gamete formation.
This law applies only to genes (allele pairs) located on 
different chromosomes (that is, on chromosomes that are 
not homologous) or, alternatively, to genes that are very 
far apart on the same chromosome. (This will be explained 
in Concept 15.3, along with the more complex inheritance 
patterns of genes located near each other, alleles of which 
tend to be inherited together.) All the pea characters Mendel 
chose for analysis were controlled by genes on different chro-
mosomes or were far apart on the same chromosome; this sit-
uation greatly simplified interpretation of his multicharacter 
pea crosses. All the examples we consider in the rest of this 
chapter involve genes located on different chromosomes.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Independent Assortment
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   325 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 327 ===

326 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
/uni25BC Figure 14.8 Inquiry
Do the alleles for one character segregate into gametes depend-
ently or independently of the alleles for a different character?
Experiment T o  f o l l o w  t h e  c h a r a c t e r s  o f  s e e d  c o l o r  a n d  s e e d  s h a p e  t h r o u g h  t h e  F2 
generation, Mendel crossed a true-breeding plant with yellow round seeds with a true-
breeding plant with green wrinkled seeds, producing dihybrid F1 plants. Self-pollination 
of the F1 dihybrids produced the F2 generation. The two hypotheses (dependent and 
independent “assortment” of the two genes) predict different phenotypic ratios.
P Generation
F1 Generation
Predictions
Predicted
offspring of
F2 generation
YYRR yyrr
YR yrGametes
Hypothesis of
 independent assortment
or
Hypothesis of
dependent assortment
Phenotypic ratio 9:3:3:1
Phenotypic ratio 3:1
Sperm
Sperm
Eggs
YyRr (dihybrid) 
3
YR14
YR14
Yr14
yR14
yr14
916 316 316 116
Yr14 yR14 yr14
YYRRYYRrYyRR YyRr
YyRR YyRr yyRR yyRr
YYRr YYrr
YR12
YR12
yr12
yr12
YYRRYyRr
YyRr yyrr
YyRr Yyrr
YyRr Yyrr yyRr yyrr
34 14
Eggs
Results
315 108 101 32 Phenotypic ratio approximately 9:3:3:1
Conclusion The results support the hypothesis of independent assortment, the only 
one that predicts two newly observed phenotypes: green round seeds and yellow wrin-
kled seeds (see the right-hand Punnett square). The alleles for each gene segregate in-
dependently of those of the other, and the two genes are said to assort independently.
Data from G. Mendel, Experiments in plant hybridization, Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn 
4:3–47 (1866).
WHAT IF? Suppose Mendel had transferred pollen from an F1 plant to the carpel of a plant that 
was homozygous recessive for both genes. Set up the cross and draw Punnett squares that predict 
the offspring for both hypotheses. Would this cross have supported the hypothesis of independent 
assortment equally well?
  Mastering Biology 
Animation: Mendel’s Cross of Two Characters: Seed Shape and Seed Color 
Animation: A Simplified Cross of Two Characters in Humans  
Animation: Crosses of Two Characters in “MendAliens”
CONCEPT CHECK 14.1
1. DRAW IT Pea plants heterozygous 
for flower position and stem length 
(AaTt) are allowed to self-pollinate, 
and 400 of the resulting seeds are 
planted. Draw a Punnett square for 
this cross. How many offspring would 
be predicted to have terminal flowers 
and be dwarf? (See Table 14.1.)
2. WHAT IF? You have two pea plants 
with purple flowers and wrinkled 
seeds. The plants are not true- 
breeding. Explain whether you can 
obtain a plant with white flowers and 
round seeds by crossing these plants. 
(See Table 14.1.)
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS In some 
pea plant crosses, the plants are 
 self-pollinated. Is self-pollination 
considered asexual or sexual reproduc-
tion? Explain. (See Concept 13.1.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 14.2
Probability laws 
govern Mendelian 
inheritance
Mendel’s laws of segregation and indepen-
dent assortment reflect the same rules of 
probability that apply to tossing coins, roll-
ing dice, and drawing cards from a deck. 
The probability scale ranges from 0 to 1. An 
event that is certain to occur has a proba-
bility of 1, while an event that is certain not 
to occur has a probability of 0. With a coin 
that has heads on both sides, the probabil-
ity of tossing heads is 1, and the probability 
of tossing tails is 0. With a normal coin, 
the chance of tossing heads is 1⁄2, and the 
chance of tossing tails is 1⁄2. The probability 
of drawing the ace of spades from a 52-card 
deck is  1⁄52. The probabilities of all possible 
outcomes for an event must add up to 1. 
With a deck of cards, the chance of picking 
a card other than the ace of spades is 51⁄52.
Tossing a coin illustrates an important 
lesson about probability. For every toss, 
the probability of heads is 1⁄2. The outcome 
of any particular toss is unaffected by 
what has happened on previous trials. We 
refer to phenomena such as coin tosses as 
independent events. Each toss of a coin, 
whether done sequentially with one coin 
or simultaneously with many, is inde-
pendent of every other toss. And like two 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   326 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 328 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 327
separate coin tosses, the alleles of one gene segregate into gametes 
independently of another gene’s alleles (the law of independent 
assortment). We’ll now look at two basic rules of probability that 
help us predict the outcome of the fusion of such gametes in 
simple monohybrid crosses and more complicated crosses as well.
The Multiplication and Addition Rules 
Applied to Monohybrid Crosses
How do we determine the probability that two or more indepen-
dent events will occur together in some specific combination? 
For example, what is the chance that two coins tossed simulta-
neously will both land heads up? The multiplication rule 
states that to determine the probability of one event and the 
other occurring, we multiply the probability of one event (one 
coin coming up heads) by the probability of the other event (the 
other coin coming up heads). By the multiplication rule, then, 
the probability that both coins will land heads up is 1⁄2*1⁄2=1⁄4.
We can apply the same reasoning to an F1 monohybrid cross. 
With seed shape in pea plants as the heritable character, the 
genotype of F1 plants is Rr. Segregation in a heterozygous plant 
is like flipping a coin in terms of calculating the probability of 
each outcome: Each egg produced has a 1⁄2 chance of carrying 
the dominant allele (R) and a 1⁄2 chance of carrying the recessive 
allele (r). The same odds apply to each sperm cell produced. For 
a particular F2 plant to have wrinkled seeds, the recessive trait, 
both the egg and the sperm that come together must carry the 
r allele. The probability that an r allele will be present in the egg 
and in the sperm at fertilization is found by multiplying  1⁄2 (the 
probability that the egg will have an r)*1⁄2 (the probability 
that the sperm will have an r). Thus, the multiplication rule tells 
us that the probability of an F2 plant having wrinkled seeds (rr) 
is 1⁄4 (Figure 14.9). Likewise, the probability of an F2 plant carry-
ing both dominant alleles for seed shape (RR) is 1⁄4.
To figure out the probability that an F2 plant from a 
monohybrid cross will be heterozygous rather than homo-
zygous, we need to invoke a second rule. Notice in Figure 
14.9 that the dominant allele can come from the egg and the 
recessive allele from the sperm, or vice versa. That is, F1 gam-
etes can combine to produce Rr offspring in two mutually 
exclusive ways: For any particular heterozygous F2 plant, the 
dominant allele can come from the egg or the sperm, but not 
from both. According to the addition rule, the probability 
that any one of two or more mutually exclusive events (one 
event or the other) will occur is calculated by adding their 
individual probabilities. As we have just seen, the multipli-
cation rule gives us the individual probabilities that we will 
now add together. The probability for one possible way of 
obtaining an F2 heterozygote—the dominant allele from the 
egg and the recessive allele from the sperm—is 1⁄4. The prob-
ability for the other possible way—the recessive allele from 
the egg and the dominant allele from the sperm—is also 1⁄4 
(see Figure 14.9). Using the rule of addition, then, we can cal-
culate the probability of an F2 heterozygote as 1⁄4+1⁄4=1⁄2. 
(Note that use of the word and in the statement is a clue that 
you should use the multiplication rule, while or suggests use 
of the addition rule.)
Solving Complex Genetics Problems  
with the Rules of Probability
We can also apply the rules of probability to predict the out-
come of crosses involving multiple characters. Recall that 
each allelic pair (gene) segregates independently during gam-
ete formation (the law of independent assortment). Thus, a 
dihybrid or other multicharacter cross is equivalent to two or 
more independent monohybrid crosses occurring simultane-
ously. By applying what we have learned about monohybrid 
crosses, we can determine the probability of specific geno-
types occurring in the F2 generation without having to con-
struct unwieldy Punnett squares.
Consider the dihybrid cross between YyRr heterozygotes 
shown in Figure 14.8. We will focus first on the seed-color 
character. For a monohybrid cross of Yy plants, we can use a 
simple Punnett square to determine that the probabilities of 
the offspring genotypes are 1⁄4 for YY, 1⁄2 for Yy, and 1⁄4 for yy. 
We can draw a second Punnett square to determine that the 
same probabilities apply to the offspring genotypes for seed 
shape: 1⁄4 RR, 1⁄2 Rr, and 1⁄4 rr. Knowing these probabilities, we 
can simply use the multiplication rule to determine the prob-
ability of each of the genotypes in the F2 generation. To give 
14 14
12
12
12
12
14 14
3
Segregation of
alleles into eggs
Segregation of
alleles into sperm
Sperm 
Eggs
Rr Rr
R
 R
R
 r
r
r
 r
R
 r
r
R
R
. Figure 14.9 Segregation of alleles and fertilization as 
chance events. When a heterozygote (Rr) forms gametes, whether 
a particular gamete ends up with an R or an r is like the toss of a 
coin. We can determine the probability for any genotype among 
the offspring of two heterozygotes by multiplying together the 
individual probabilities of an egg and sperm having a particular 
allele (R or r in this example).
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   327 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 329 ===

328 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
two examples, the calculations for finding the probabilities of 
two of the possible F2 genotypes (YYRR and YyRR) are shown 
below:
YYRR (RR)(probability of YY)14 14 116
YyRR
Probability of
Probability of (RR)(Yy)12 14 18
The YYRR genotype corresponds to the upper left box in the 
larger Punnett square in Figure 14.8 (one box=1⁄16). Looking 
closely at the larger Punnett square in Figure 14.8, you will see 
that 2 of the 16 boxes (1⁄8) correspond to the YyRR genotype.
Now let’s see how we can combine the multiplication 
and addition rules to solve even more complex problems in 
Mendelian genetics. Imagine a cross of two pea varieties in 
which we track the inheritance of three characters. Let’s cross 
a trihybrid with purple flowers and yellow round seeds (het-
erozygous for all three genes) with a plant with purple flowers 
and green wrinkled seeds (heterozygous for flower color but 
homozygous recessive for the other two characters). Using 
Mendelian symbols, our cross is PpYyRr*Ppyyrr. What frac-
tion of offspring from this cross are predicted to exhibit the 
recessive phenotypes for at least two of the three characters?
To answer this question, we can start by listing all geno-
types we could get that fulfill this condition: ppyyRr, ppYyrr, 
Ppyyrr, PPyyrr, and ppyyrr. (Because the condition is at least two 
recessive traits, it includes the last genotype, which shows all 
three recessive traits.) Next, we calculate the probability for 
each of these genotypes resulting from our PpYyRr*Ppyyrr 
cross by multiplying together the individual probabilities for 
the allele pairs, just as we did in our dihybrid example. Note 
that in a cross involving heterozygous and homozygous allele 
pairs (for example, Yy*yy), the probability of heterozygous 
(Yy) offspring is 1⁄2 and the probability of homozygous (in this 
case, yy) offspring is 1⁄2. Finally, we use the addition rule to 
add the probabilities for all the different genotypes that fulfill 
the condition of at least two recessive traits resulting from our 
PpYyRr*Ppyyrr cross, as shown below:
ppyyRr
ppYyrr
Ppyyrr
PPyyrr
ppyyrr
Chance of at least two recessive traits
(probability of pp) ( yy)14
( pp) 14 (Yy)12 (rr)12
12 12
616 38
3
3
3
3
3 116
1165
5
(Pp) 12 ( yy)12 (rr)123 2165
3(PP) 14 ( yy)12 (rr)123 1165
3( pp) 14 ( yy)12 (rr)123 1165
55
(Rr)
In time, you’ll be able to solve genetics problems faster by 
using the rules of probability than by filling in Punnett 
squares.
We cannot predict with certainty the exact numbers of 
progeny of different genotypes resulting from a genetic cross. 
But the rules of probability give us the likelihood of various 
outcomes. Usually, the larger the sample size, the closer the 
results will conform to our predictions. Mendel understood 
1. An individual with cystic fibrosis (genotype ff) marries a 
heterozygous individual who carries a copy of the recessive 
allele (genotype Ff). What proportions of the offspring are 
expected to be homozygous dominant, homozygous reces-
sive, and heterozygous?
2. If two organisms, both with the genotype AaBb, are mated, 
what is the probability of obtaining the genotypes AABB 
and AaBb in the F2 generation?
3. WHAT IF? Three characters (flower color, seed color, and 
pod shape) are considered in a cross between two pea plants: 
PpYyIi*ppYyIi. Using the rules of probability, determine the 
fraction of offspring predicted to be homozygous recessive 
for at least two of the three characters.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 14.2
Inheritance patterns are often 
more complex than predicted by 
simple Mendelian genetics
In the 1900s, geneticists extended Mendelian principles 
not only to diverse organisms, but also to patterns of inher-
itance more complex than those described by Mendel. For 
the work that led to his two laws of inheritance, Mendel 
chose pea plant characters that turn out to have a relatively 
simple genetic basis: Each character is determined by one 
gene, for which there are only two alleles, one completely 
dominant and the other completely recessive. (There is one 
exception: Mendel’s pod shape character is actually deter-
mined by two genes.) Not all heritable characters are deter-
mined so simply, and the relationship between genotype 
and phenotype is rarely so straightforward. Mendel himself 
realized that he could not explain the more complicated 
patterns he observed in crosses involving other pea char-
acters or other plant species. This does not diminish the 
utility of Mendelian genetics, however, because the basic 
principles of segregation and independent assortment 
apply even to more complex patterns of inheritance. In 
this section, we will extend Mendelian genetics to heredi-
tary patterns that were not reported by Mendel.
Extending Mendelian Genetics  
for a Single Gene
The inheritance of characters determined by a single gene 
deviates from simple Mendelian patterns when alleles are not 
completely dominant or recessive, when a particular gene has 
this statistical feature of inheritance and had a keen sense of 
the rules of chance. It was for this reason that he set up his 
experiments so as to generate, and then count, large numbers 
of offspring from his crosses.
CONCEPT 14.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   328 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 330 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 329
more than two alleles, or when a single gene produces mul-
tiple phenotypes. We will describe examples of each of these 
situations in this section.
Degrees of Dominance
Alleles can show different degrees of dominance and reces-
siveness in relation to each other. In Mendel’s classic 
pea crosses, the F1 offspring always looked like one of the 
two parental varieties because one allele in a pair showed 
complete dominance over the other. In such situations, 
the phenotypes of the heterozygote and the dominant homo-
zygote are indistinguishable (see Figure 14.6).
For some genes, however, neither allele is completely 
dominant, and the F1 hybrids have a phenotype somewhere 
between those of the two parental varieties. This phenom-
enon, called incomplete dominance, is seen when red 
snapdragons are crossed with white snapdragons: All the F1 
hybrids have pink flowers (Figure 14.10). This third, inter-
mediate phenotype results from flowers of the heterozygotes 
having less red pigment than the red homozygotes. (This is 
unlike the case of Mendel’s pea plants, where the Pp hetero-
zygotes make enough pigment for the flowers to be purple, 
indistinguishable from those of PP plants.)
At first glance, incomplete dominance of either allele 
seems to provide evidence for the blending hypothesis of 
inheritance, which would predict that the red or white trait 
could never reappear among offspring of the pink hybrids. 
In fact, interbreeding F1 hybrids produces F2 offspring with a 
phenotypic ratio of one red to two pink to one white. (Because 
heterozygotes have a separate phenotype from homozygotes, 
the genotypic and phenotypic ratios for the F2 generation are 
the same, 1:2:1.) The segregation of the red-flower and white-
flower alleles in the gametes produced by the pink-flowered 
plants confirms that the alleles for flower color are heritable 
factors that maintain their identity in the hybrids; that is, that 
the factors are discrete rather than “blendable.”
Another variation on dominance relationships between 
alleles is called codominance; in this variation, the two 
alleles each affect the phenotype in separate, distinguishable 
ways. For example, the human MN blood group is determined 
by codominant alleles for two specific molecules located on 
the surface of red blood cells, the M and N molecules. A single 
gene (L), for which two allelic variations are possible (LM or LN),  
determines the phenotype of this blood group. Individuals 
homozygous for the LM allele (LMLM) have red blood cells with 
only M molecules; individuals homozygous for the LN allele 
(LNLN) have red blood cells with only N molecules. But both M 
and N molecules are present on the red blood cells of individu-
als heterozygous for the M and N alleles (LMLN). Note that the 
MN phenotype is not intermediate between the M and N phe-
notypes, which distinguishes codominance from incomplete 
dominance. Rather, both M and N phenotypes are exhibited by 
heterozygotes, since both molecules are present.
The Relationship Between Dominance and 
Phenotype We’ve now seen that the relative effects of two 
alleles range from complete dominance of one allele to in-
complete dominance of either allele to codominance of both 
alleles. It is important to understand that an allele is called 
dominant because it is seen in the phenotype, not because it 
somehow subdues a recessive allele. Alleles are simply varia-
tions in a gene’s nucleotide sequence (see Figure 14.4). When 
a dominant allele coexists with a recessive allele in a hetero-
zygote, they do not actually interact at all. It is in the pathway 
from genotype to phenotype that dominance and recessive-
ness come into play.
To illustrate the relationship between dominance 
and phenotype, we can use one of the characters Mendel 
 Mastering Biology Animation: Incomplete Dominance 
in “MendAliens”
P Generation
F1 Generation
F2 Generation
Red
CRCR 3
Gametes
White
CWCW
CW
CW
CW
CW
Gametes
Pink
CRCW
Eggs
Sperm
CR
CR
CWCWCRCW
CRCR CRCW
12 12
12CR12
12
CR12
. Figure 14.10 Incomplete dominance in snapdragon color. 
When red snapdragons are crossed with white ones, the F1 hybrids 
have pink flowers. Segregation of alleles into gametes of the F1 plants 
results in an F2 generation with a 1:2:1 ratio for both genotype and 
phenotype. Neither allele is dominant, so rather than using upper- and 
lowercase letters, we use the letter C with a superscript to indicate an 
allele for flower color: C R for red and C W for white.
? Suppose a classmate argues that this figure supports the blending 
hypothesis for inheritance. What might your classmate say, and how 
would you respond?
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   329 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 331 ===

330 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Multiple Alleles
Only two alleles exist for the pea characters that Mendel stud-
ied, but most genes have more than two alleles. The ABO blood 
groups in humans, for instance, are determined by the two 
alleles a person has of the blood group gene; the three possible 
alleles are IA, IB, and i. A person’s blood group may be one of four 
types: A, B, AB, or O. These letters refer to two carbohydrates—
A and B—that may be found attached to specific cell-surface 
molecules on red blood cells. An individual’s blood cells may 
have carbohydrate A (type A blood), carbohydrate B (type B), 
both (type AB), or neither (type O), as shown in Figure 14.11, 
along with the relevant genotypes. Matching compatible blood 
groups is critical for safe blood transfusions (see Concept 47.3).
studied—round versus wrinkled pea seed shape. The domi-
nant allele (round) codes for an enzyme that helps convert 
an unbranched form of starch to a branched form in the seed. 
The recessive allele (wrinkled) codes for a defective form of 
this enzyme, leading to an accumulation of unbranched 
starch, which causes excess water to enter the seed by osmo-
sis. Later, when the seed dries, it wrinkles. If a dominant allele 
is present, no excess water enters the seed and it does not 
wrinkle when it dries. One dominant allele results in enough 
of the enzyme to synthesize adequate amounts of branched 
starch, which means that dominant homozygotes and het-
erozygotes have the same phenotype: round seeds.
A closer look at the relationship between dominance and 
phenotype reveals an intriguing fact: For any character, the 
observed dominant/recessive relationship of alleles depends 
on the level at which we examine phenotype. Tay-Sachs 
disease, an inherited disorder in humans, is an example. 
The brain cells of a child with Tay-Sachs disease cannot 
metabolize certain lipids because a crucial enzyme does not 
work properly. As these lipids accumulate in brain cells, the 
child begins to suffer seizures, blindness, and degeneration of 
motor and mental performance and dies within a few years.
Only children who inherit two copies of the Tay-Sachs 
allele (homozygotes) have the disease. Thus, at the organismal 
level, the Tay-Sachs allele qualifies as recessive. However, the 
activity level of the lipid-metabolizing enzyme in heterozy-
gotes is intermediate between the activity level in individu-
als homozygous for the normal allele and the activity level 
in individuals with Tay-Sachs disease. (The term normal is 
used in the genetic sense to refer to the allele coding for the 
enzyme that functions properly.) The intermediate phe-
notype observed at the biochemical level is characteristic 
of incomplete dominance of either allele. Fortunately, the 
heterozygote condition does not lead to disease symptoms, 
apparently because half the normal enzyme activity is suf-
ficient to prevent lipid accumulation in the brain. Extending 
our analysis to yet another level, we find that heterozygous 
individuals produce equal numbers of normal and dysfunc-
tional enzyme molecules. Thus, at the molecular level, the 
normal allele and the Tay-Sachs allele are codominant. As you 
can see, whether alleles appear to be completely dominant, 
incompletely dominant, or codominant depends on the level 
at which the phenotype is analyzed.
Frequency of Dominant Alleles While you might assume 
that the dominant allele for a particular character would be 
more common than the recessive allele, this is not always the 
case. For an example of a rare dominant allele, about one baby 
out of 400 in the United States is born with extra fingers or 
toes, a condition known as polydactyly. Some cases are caused 
by the presence of a dominant allele. The low frequency of 
these types of polydactyly indicates that the recessive allele, 
which results in five digits per appendage, is far more preva-
lent than the dominant allele in the population.
Allele
Genotype or or
Red blood cell
with surface 
carbohydrates
Phenotype
(blood group)
Carbohydrate
(a) The three alleles for the ABO blood groups and their 
carbohydrates. Each allele codes for an enzyme that may add 
a specific carbohydrate (designated by the superscript on the 
allele and shown as a triangle or circle) to red blood cells.
(b) Blood group genotypes and phenotypes. There are six 
possible genotypes, resulting in four different phenotypes.
A B none
AB AB O
IA IB i
IAIA IAiIBIB IBiI AIB ii
. Figure 14.11 Multiple alleles for the ABO blood groups. The 
four blood groups result from different combinations of three alleles.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on the surface carbohydrate phenotype in part 
(b), what are the dominance relationships among the alleles?
Pleiotropy
So far, we have treated Mendelian inheritance as though 
each gene affects only one phenotypic character. Most genes, 
however, have multiple phenotypic effects, a property called 
pleiotropy (from the Greek pleion, more). In humans, for 
example, pleiotropic alleles are responsible for the multiple 
symptoms associated with certain hereditary diseases, such 
as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell disease, discussed later in this 
chapter. In the garden pea, the gene that determines flower 
color also affects the color of the coating on the outer surface 
of the seed, which can be gray or white. Given the intricate 
molecular and cellular interactions responsible for an organ-
ism’s development and physiology, it isn’t surprising that a 
single gene can affect a number of characters.
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   330 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 332 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 331
Extending Mendelian Genetics for Two  
or More Genes
Dominance relationships, multiple alleles, and pleiotropy all 
have to do with the effects of the alleles of a single gene. We now 
consider two situations in which two or more genes are involved 
in determining a particular phenotype. In the first case, called 
epistasis, one gene affects the phenotype of another because the 
two gene products interact; in the second case, called polygenic 
inheritance, multiple genes independently affect a single trait.
Epistasis
In epistasis (from the Greek for “standing upon”), the phe-
notypic expression of a gene at one locus alters that of a gene 
at a second locus. An example will help clarify this concept. 
In Labrador retrievers (commonly called “Labs”), black coat 
color is dominant to brown. Let’s designate B and b as the 
two alleles for this character. For a Lab to have brown fur, its 
genotype must be bb; these dogs are called chocolate Labs. 
But there is more to the story. A second gene determines 
whether or not pigment will be deposited in the hair. The 
dominant allele, symbolized by E, results in the deposition of 
either black or brown pigment, depending on the genotype 
at the first locus. But if the Lab is homozygous recessive for 
the second locus (ee), then the coat is yellow, regardless of the 
genotype at the black/brown locus (yellow Labs). In this case, 
the gene for pigment deposition (E/e) is said to be epistatic to 
the gene that codes for black or brown pigment (B/b).
What happens if we mate black Labs that are heterozygous 
for both genes (BbEe)? Although the two genes affect the same 
phenotypic character (coat color), they follow the law of 
independent assortment. Thus, our breeding experiment rep-
resents an F1 dihybrid cross, like those that produced a 9:3:3:1 
ratio in Mendel’s experiments. We can use a Punnett square 
to represent the genotypes of the F2 offspring (Figure 14.12). 
As a result of epistasis, the phenotypic ratio among the F2 off-
spring is 9 black to 3 chocolate to 4 yellow Labs. Other types 
of epistatic interactions produce different ratios, but all are 
modified versions of 9:3:3:1.
Polygenic Inheritance
Mendel studied characters that could be classified on an 
either-or basis, such as purple versus white flower color. But 
many characters, such as human skin color and height, are 
not one of two discrete characters, but instead vary in the 
population in gradations along a continuum. These are called 
quantitative characters. Quantitative variation usually 
indicates polygenic inheritance, an additive effect of two 
or more genes on a single phenotypic character. (In a way, 
this is the converse of pleiotropy, where a single gene affects 
several phenotypic characters.) Height is a good example 
of polygenic inheritance: In 2014, a genomic study of over 
250,000 people found almost 700 genetic variations in over 
180 genes that affect height. Many variations were in or near 
genes involved in biochemical pathways affecting growth of 
the skeleton, but others were associated with genes not obvi-
ously related to growth. Another study in 2018, of 300,000 
individuals, identified 124 genes that affect hair color. 
Although simplifying can sometimes be valuable in under-
standing genetic principles, as we’ll see shortly, the classic 
idea of a single gene determining eye color or hair color or 
other such traits is an oversimplification. (Earlobe attach-
ment, an example used until a decade ago in this textbook, 
was shown in 2017 to be affected by nearly 50 genes!)
Skin pigmentation in humans is also controlled by many 
separately inherited genes—378 at latest count, many of 
which are involved in the production of melanin skin pig-
ments. Here, we’ll simplify the story in order to understand the 
concept of polygenic inheritance. Let’s consider three genes, 
with a dark-skin allele for each gene (A, B, or C) contributing 
one “unit” of darkness (also a simplification) to the phenotype 
and being incompletely dominant to the other, light-skin 
allele (a, b, or c). In our model, an AABBCC person would be 
very dark, whereas an aabbcc individual would be very light. 
BE
BE
bE
Be
be
Sperm
9 3: 4:
Eggs
3
bbeeBbee
BBeeBbEe
BbEe
BbEeBBEeBBEE
BBEe
BbEE
BbEE bbEE
bbEe
BbEeBbEe
14
14 bE14 Be14 be14
14
14
14
Bbee
bbEeBbEe
. Figure 14.12 An example of epistasis. This Punnett square 
illustrates the genotypes and phenotypes predicted for offspring 
of matings between two black Labrador retrievers of genotype 
BbEe. The E/e gene, which is epistatic to the B/b gene coding for 
hair pigment, controls whether or not pigment of any color will be 
deposited in the hair.
VISUAL SKILLS Compare the four squares in the lower right of this 
Punnett square with those in Figure 14.8. Explain the genetic basis for 
the difference between the ratio (9:3:4) of phenotypes seen in this cross 
and the 9:3:3:1 ratio seen in Figure 14.8.
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   331 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 333 ===

332 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
influences height, exercise alters build, sun-tanning darkens 
the skin, and experience improves performance on intelligence 
tests. Even identical twins, who are genetic equals, accumulate 
phenotypic differences as a result of their unique experiences.
Whether human characters are more influenced by genes or 
the environment—in everyday terms, nature versus nurture—
is a debate that we will not attempt to settle here. We can say, 
however, that a genotype generally is not associated with a rig-
idly defined phenotype, but rather with a range of phenotypic 
possibilities due to environmental influences (Figure 14.14). 
For some characters, such as the ABO blood group system, the 
phenotypic range is extremely narrow; that is, a given geno-
type mandates a very specific phenotype. Other characters, 
such as a person’s blood count of red and white cells, vary quite 
a bit, depending on such factors as the altitude, the customary 
level of physical activity, and the presence of infectious agents.
An AaBbCc person would have skin of an intermediate shade. 
Because the alleles have a cumulative effect, the genotypes 
AaBbCc and AABbcc would make the same genetic contribu-
tion (three units) to skin darkness. There are seven skin color 
phenotypes that could result from a mating between AaBbCc 
heterozygotes, as shown in Figure 14.13. In a large number 
of such matings, the majority of offspring would be expected 
to have intermediate phenotypes (skin color in the middle 
range). You can graph the predictions from the Punnett square 
in the Scientific Skills Exercise. Environmental factors, such as 
exposure to the sun, also affect the skin color phenotype.
Nature and Nurture: The Environmental 
Impact on Phenotype
Another departure from simple Mendelian genetics arises when 
the phenotype for a character depends on environment as well 
as genotype. A single tree, locked into its inherited genotype, 
has leaves that vary in size, shape, and greenness, depending 
on their exposure to wind and sun. For humans, nutrition 
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video:  
The Biology of Skin Color 
AaBbCc AaBbCc
Phenotypes:
Eggs
0123456
Number of
dark-skin alleles:
3
18
18 18 18 1818 18 18 18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
164 664 664 1641564 2064 1564
Sperm
. Figure 14.13 A simplified model for polygenic inheritance 
of skin color. In this model, three separately inherited genes 
affect skin color. (The reported number is actually 378 genes.) 
The heterozygous individuals (AaBbCc) represented by the two 
rectangles at the top of this figure each carry three dark-skin 
alleles (black circles, which represent A, B, or C) and three light-
skin alleles (white circles, which represent a, b, or c). The Punnett 
square shows all possible genetic combinations in gametes and 
offspring of hypothetical matings between these two. The results 
are summarized by phenotypic frequencies (fractions) under the 
Punnett square. (The phenotypic ratio is 1:6:15:20:15:6:1.)
(a) Hydrangeas grown in 
basic soil
(b) Hydrangeas of the same
genetic variety grown in
acidic soil with free aluminum
. Figure 14.14 The effect of environment on phenotype. The 
outcome of a genotype lies within a phenotypic range that depends 
on the environment in which the genotype is expressed. For 
example, the acidity and free aluminum content of the soil affect 
the color of hydrangea flowers, which range from pink (basic soil) to 
blue-violet (acidic soil). Free aluminum is necessary for bluer colors.
Generally, the phenotypic range is broadest for poly-
genic characters. Environment contributes to the quan-
titative nature of these characters, as we have seen in the 
 continuous variation of skin color. Geneticists refer to such 
characters as multifactorial, meaning that many factors, 
both genetic and environmental, collectively influence 
phenotype.
A Mendelian View of Heredity and Variation
We have now broadened our view of Mendelian inheritance by 
exploring degrees of dominance as well as multiple alleles, plei-
otropy, epistasis, polygenic inheritance, and the phenotypic 
impact of the environment. How can we integrate these refine-
ments into a comprehensive theory of Mendelian genetics? The 
key is to make the transition from the reductionist emphasis on 
single genes and phenotypic characters to the emergent proper-
ties of the organism as a whole, one of the themes of this book.
The term phenotype can refer not only to specific char-
acters, such as flower color and blood group, but also to 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   332 3/21/20   1:31 AM

=== SIDE 334 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 333
an organism in its entirety—all aspects of its physical 
appearance, internal anatomy, physiology, and behavior. 
Similarly, the term genotype can refer to an organism’s entire 
genetic makeup, not just its alleles for a single genetic locus. 
In most cases, a gene’s impact on phenotype is affected by 
other genes and by the environment. In this integrated view 
of heredity and variation, an organism’s phenotype reflects 
its overall genotype and unique environmental history.
Considering all that can occur in the pathway from geno-
type to phenotype, it is indeed impressive that Mendel could 
uncover the fundamental principles governing the transmission 
of individual genes from parents to offspring. Mendel’s laws of 
segregation and of independent assortment explain heritable 
variations in terms of alternative forms of genes (hereditary 
“particles,” now known as the alleles of genes) that are passed 
along, generation after generation, according to simple rules of 
probability. This theory of inheritance is equally valid for peas, 
flies, fishes, birds, and human beings—indeed, for any organ-
ism with a sexual life cycle. Furthermore, by extending the 
principles of segregation and independent assortment to help 
explain such hereditary patterns as epistasis and quantitative 
characters, we begin to see how broadly Mendelian genetics 
applies. From Mendel’s abbey garden came a theory of inheri-
tance that anchors modern genetics. In the last section of this 
chapter, we will apply Mendelian genetics to human inheri-
tance, with emphasis on the transmission of hereditary diseases.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Making a Histogram and Analyzing  
a Distribution Pattern
What Is the Distribution of Phenotypes Among Offspring 
of Two Parents Who Are Both Heterozygous for Three 
Additive Genes? Human skin color is a polygenic trait that is 
determined by the additive effects of many different genes. In 
this exercise, you will work with a simplified model of skin color 
genetics where only three genes are assumed to affect the dark-
ness of skin color and where each gene has two alleles—dark or 
light (see Figure 14.13). In this model, each dark allele contrib-
utes equally to the darkness of skin color, and each pair of al-
leles segregates independently of any other pair. Using a type of 
graph called a histogram, you will determine the distribution of 
phenotypes of offspring with different numbers of dark-skin al-
leles. (For additional information about graphs, see the Scientific 
Skills Review in Appendix D.)
How This Model Is Analyzed To predict the phenotypes of the 
offspring of parents heterozygous for the three genes in our simpli-
fied model, we can use the Punnett square in Figure 14.13. The het-
erozygous individuals (AaBbCc) represented by the two rectangles at 
the top of that figure each carry three dark-skin alleles (black circles, 
which represent A, B, or C) and three light-skin alleles (white circles, 
which represent a, b, or c). The Punnett square shows all the possible 
genetic combinations in gametes and in offspring of a large number 
of hypothetical matings between these heterozygotes.
Predictions from the Punnett Square If we assume that each 
square in the Punnett square represents one offspring of the het-
erozygous AaBbCc parents, then the squares below show the pos-
sible skin color phenotypes and their predicted frequencies. Below 
the squares is the number of dark-skin alleles for each phenotype.
Phenotypes:
0123456
Number of
dark-skin alleles:
164 664 664 1641564 2064 1564
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. A histogram is a bar graph that shows the distribution of nu-
meric data (here, the number of dark-skin alleles). To make a 
histogram of the allele distribution, put skin color (as the num-
ber of dark-skin alleles) along the x-axis and predicted number 
of offspring (out of 64) with each phenotype on the y-axis. 
There are no gaps in these allele data, so draw the bars next to 
each other with no space in between.
2. You can see that the skin-color phenotypes are not distributed 
uniformly. (a) Which phenotype has the highest frequency? 
Draw a vertical dashed line through that bar. (b) Distributions 
of values like this one tend to show one of several common 
patterns. Sketch a rough curve that approximates the values 
and look at its shape. Is it symmetrically distributed around 
a central peak value (a “normal distribution,” sometimes 
called a bell curve); is it skewed to one end of the x-axis or the 
other (a “skewed distribution”); or does it show two apparent 
groups of frequencies (a “bimodal distribution”)? Explain 
the reason for the curve’s shape. (It will help to read the text 
description that supports Figure 14.13.)
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Further Reading R. A. Sturm, A golden age of human pigmentation genetics, 
Trends in Genetics 22:464–468 (2006).
1. Incomplete dominance and epistasis are both terms that 
define genetic relationships. What is the most basic distinc-
tion between these terms?
2. If a man with type AB blood marries a woman with type O, 
what blood types would you expect in their children? What 
fraction would you expect of each type?
3. WHAT IF? A rooster with gray feathers and a hen of the 
same phenotype produce 15 gray, 6 black, and 8 white chicks. 
What is the simplest explanation for the inheritance of these 
colors in chickens? What phenotypes would you expect in the 
offspring of a cross between a gray rooster and a black hen?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 14.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   333 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 335 ===

334 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Many human traits follow 
Mendelian patterns of inheritance
The study of human genetics is fueled by our desire to under-
stand our own inheritance and to develop treatments for 
genetically based diseases. While peas are convenient subjects 
for genetic research, humans are not. The human generation 
span is long (about 20 years), human parents produce many 
fewer offspring than peas, and breeding experiments would 
be unethical!
Pedigree Analysis
In place of breeding experiments, geneticists analyze the 
results of human matings that have already occurred. They 
collect information about a family’s history for a particular 
trait and assemble this information into a family tree describ-
ing the trait across the generations—a family pedigree.
Figure 14.15a shows a three-generation pedigree that 
traces the occurrence of a pointed contour of the hairline on 
the forehead. We simplify the genetics of this trait, called a 
widow’s peak, by assuming it is due to a dominant allele, W. 
(In reality, other genes are probably also involved.) In our 
model, because the widow’s peak allele is dominant, all 
individuals who lack a widow’s peak must be homozygous 
recessive (ww). The two grandparents with widow’s peaks 
must have the Ww genotype since some of their offspring are 
homozygous recessive. The offspring in the second genera-
tion who do have widow’s peaks must also be heterozygous 
because they are the products of Ww*ww matings. The 
third generation in this pedigree consists of two sisters. The 
one who has a widow’s peak could be either homozygous 
(WW) or heterozygous (Ww), given what we know about the 
genotypes of her parents (both Ww).
Figure 14.15b is a pedigree of the same family, but 
this time we focus on a recessive trait, the inability of 
individuals to taste a chemical called PTC (phenylthiocar-
bamide). Compounds similar to PTC are found in broccoli, 
brussels sprouts, and related vegetables and account for the 
bitter taste some people report when eating these foods. 
We’ll use t for the recessive allele and T for the dominant 
allele, which results in the ability to taste PTC. As you work 
your way through the pedigree, notice once again that 
you can apply what you have learned about Mendelian 
inheritance to understand the genotypes shown for the 
family members.
An important application of a pedigree is to help us calcu-
late the probability that a future child will have a particular 
genotype and phenotype. Suppose that the couple repre-
sented in the second generation of Figure 14.15 decides to 
have one more child. What is the probability that the child 
will have a widow’s peak? This is equivalent to a Mendelian F1 
. Figure 14.15 Pedigree analysis. Each pedigree traces a trait through 
three generations of the same family; the two traits have different 
inheritance patterns. For the sake of understanding genetic principles, 
each trait is shown as being determined by two alleles of a single gene— 
a simplification, since other genes likely also affect these two characters.
1st generation
(grandparents)
Male
Female
Male with 
the trait
Mating
Offspring, in
birth order
(first-born on left)
Female with 
the trait
3rd generation
(two sisters)
Widow’s peak No widow’s peak
2nd generation
(parents, aunts,
and uncles)
1st generation
(grandparents)
3rd generation
(two sisters)
Cannot taste PTC Can taste PTC
2nd generation
(parents, aunts,
and uncles)
Ww Ww
Ww
WW
or
Ww
Ww Wwww ww
ww
ww
ww ww
Tt Tt
TT or Tt
tt TT
or
Tt
Tt Tttt tt tt
Tt tt
(a) Is a widow’s peak a dominant or recessive trait? 
Tips for pedigree analysis: Notice in the third generation that 
the second-born daughter lacks a widow’s peak, although both 
of her parents had the trait. Such a pattern indicates that the trait 
is due to a dominant allele. If it were due to a recessive allele, and 
both parents had the recessive phenotype (straight hairline), all of 
their offspring would also have the recessive phenotype.
(b) Is the inability to taste a chemical called PTC a dominant or 
recessive trait?
Tips for pedigree analysis: Notice that the first-born daughter 
in the third generation has the trait (is unable to taste PTC), 
although both parents lack that trait (they can taste PTC). Such 
a pattern is explained if the non-taster phenotype is due to a 
recessive allele. If it were due to a dominant allele, then at least 
one parent would also have had the trait.
Key
CONCEPT 14.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   334 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 336 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 335
monohybrid cross (Ww*Ww), and therefore the probability 
that a child will inherit a dominant allele and have a widow’s 
peak is 3⁄4 (1⁄4 WW+1⁄2 Ww). What is the probability that the 
child will be unable to taste PTC? We can also treat this as a 
monohybrid cross (Tt*Tt), but this time we want to know 
the chance that the offspring will be homozygous recessive 
(tt). That probability is 1⁄4. Finally, what is the chance that the 
child will have a widow’s peak and be unable to taste PTC? 
Assuming that the genes for these two characters are on dif-
ferent chromosomes, the two pairs of alleles will assort inde-
pendently in this dihybrid cross (WwTt*WwTt). Therefore, 
we can use the multiplication rule: 3⁄4 (chance of widow’s 
peak)*1⁄4 (chance of inability to taste PTC)=3⁄16 (chance of 
widow’s peak and inability to taste PTC).
Pedigrees are a more serious matter when the alleles in 
question cause disabling or deadly diseases instead of innocu-
ous human variations such as hairline or inability to taste a 
harmless chemical. However, for disorders inherited as  
simple Mendelian traits, the same techniques of pedigree 
analysis apply.
Recessively Inherited Disorders
Thousands of genetic disorders are known to be inherited as 
simple recessive traits. These disorders range in severity from 
relatively mild, such as albinism (lack of pigmentation, which 
results in susceptibility to skin cancers and vision problems), 
to life-threatening, such as cystic fibrosis.
The Behavior of Recessive Alleles
How can we account for the behavior of alleles that cause 
recessively inherited disorders? Recall that genes code for 
proteins of specific function. An allele that causes a genetic 
disorder (let’s call it allele a) codes for either a malfunction-
ing protein or no protein at all. In the case of disorders clas-
sified as recessive, heterozygotes (Aa) typically have the 
normal phenotype because one copy of the normal allele (A) 
produces a sufficient amount of the specific protein. Thus, 
a recessively inherited disorder shows up only in the homo-
zygous individuals (aa) who inherit a recessive allele from 
each parent. Although phenotypically normal with regard to 
the disorder, heterozygotes may transmit the recessive allele 
to their offspring and thus are called carriers. Figure 14.16 
illustrates these ideas using albinism as an example.
Most people who have recessive disorders are born to 
parents who are carriers of the disorder but have a normal 
phenotype, as is the case shown in the Punnett square in 
Figure 14.16. A mating between two carriers corresponds to a 
Mendelian F1 monohybrid cross, so the predicted genotypic 
ratio for the offspring is 1 AA : 2 Aa : 1 aa. Thus, each child has 
a 1⁄4 chance of inheriting a double dose of the recessive allele; 
in the case of albinism, such a child will have albinism. From 
the genotypic ratio, we also can see that out of three off-
spring with the normal phenotype (one AA plus two Aa),  
two are predicted to be heterozygous carriers,2⁄3 chance. 
Recessive homozygotes could also result from Aa*aa and 
aa*aa matings, but if the disorder is lethal before repro-
ductive age or results in sterility (neither of which is true for 
albinism), no aa individuals will reproduce. Even if recessive 
homozygotes are able to reproduce, this will occur relatively 
rarely because such individuals are much less common in 
the population than heterozygous carriers (for reasons we’ll 
examine in Concept 23.2).
In general, genetic disorders are not evenly distributed 
among all groups of people. For example, the incidence of 
Tay-Sachs disease, which we described earlier in this chapter, 
is disproportionately high among Ashkenazic Jews, Jewish 
people whose ancestors lived in central Europe. In that popu-
lation, Tay-Sachs disease occurs in one out of 3,600 births, an 
incidence about 100 times greater than that among non-Jews 
or Mediterranean (Sephardic) Jews. This uneven distribution 
results from the different genetic histories of the world’s peo-
ples during less technological times, when populations were 
more geographically (and hence genetically) isolated.
When a disease-causing recessive allele is rare, it is rela-
tively unlikely that two carriers of the same harmful allele 
will meet and mate. The probability of passing on recessive 
traits increases greatly, however, if the man and woman are 
close relatives (for example, siblings or first cousins). This is 
because people with recent common ancestors are more likely 
to carry the same recessive alleles than are unrelated people. 
Thus, these consanguineous (“same blood”) matings, indi-
cated in pedigrees by double lines, are more likely to produce 
offspring homozygous for recessive traits—including harmful 
ones. Such effects can be observed in many types of domesti-
cated and zoo animals that have become inbred.
? 
A
A
a
a
3
Normal 
phenotype
Aa
Parents
Normal 
phenotype
Aa
Sperm
Eggs
AA
Normal
phenotype
aa
Albinism
phenotype
Aa
Carrier with
normal
phenotype
Aa
Carrier with
normal
phenotype
. Figure 14.16 Albinism: a recessive trait. One of the two 
sisters shown here does not have albinism; the other does. Most 
recessive homozygotes are born to parents who are carriers of the 
disorder but themselves have a normal phenotype, the case shown 
in the Punnett square.
What is the probability that the sister without albinism is a carrier of 
the albinism allele?
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   335 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 337 ===

336 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
sickle-cell disease, and new drugs can help prevent or treat 
other problems. There is currently no widely available cure, but 
the disease is the target of ongoing gene therapy research.
Although two sickle-cell alleles are necessary for an indi-
vidual to have sickle-cell disease and thus the condition is 
considered recessive, the presence of one sickle-cell allele can 
affect the phenotype. Thus, at the organismal level, the nor-
mal allele is incompletely dominant to the sickle-cell allele 
(Figure 14.17). At the molecular level, the two alleles are 
codominant; both normal and abnormal (sickle-cell) hemo-
globins are made in heterozygotes (carriers), who are said 
to have sickle-cell trait. (Here the word “trait” is used to dis-
tinguish this condition from sickle-cell disease, not as it was 
defined earlier—as any variant of a character.) Heterozygotes 
are usually healthy but may suffer some symptoms during 
long periods of reduced blood oxygen.
About one out of ten African-Americans have sickle-cell 
trait, an unusually high frequency of heterozygotes for an 
allele with severe detrimental effects in homozygotes. Why 
haven’t evolutionary processes resulted in the disappearance of 
the allele among this population? One explanation is that  
having a single copy of the sickle-cell allele reduces the fre-
quency and severity of malaria attacks, especially among 
young children. The malaria parasite spends part of its life cycle 
in red blood cells (see Figure 28.18), and the presence of even 
heterozygous amounts of sickle-cell hemoglobin results in 
lower parasite densities and hence reduced malaria symptoms. 
Although geneticists generally agree that inbreeding causes 
an increase in autosomal recessive conditions compared to 
those resulting from matings between unrelated parents, they 
debate exactly how much human consanguinity increases the 
risk of inherited diseases. For one thing, many harmful alleles 
have such severe effects that a homozygous embryo spontane-
ously aborts long before birth. Most societies and cultures have 
laws or taboos forbidding marriages between close relatives, 
some for social or economic reasons. These rules may have also 
resulted from the empirical observation that in most popula-
tions, stillbirths and physical or biochemical abnormalities at 
birth are more common when parents are closely related.
Cystic Fibrosis
The most common lethal genetic disease in the United States 
is cystic fibrosis, which strikes one out of every 2,500 
people of European descent but is much rarer in other groups. 
Among people of European descent, one out of 25 (4%) are 
carriers of the cystic fibrosis allele. The normal allele for this 
gene codes for a membrane protein that functions in the 
transport of chloride ions between certain cells and the extra-
cellular fluid. These chloride transport channels are defective 
or absent in the plasma membranes of children who inherit 
two recessive alleles for cystic fibrosis. The result is an abnor-
mally high concentration of intracellular chloride, which 
causes an uptake of water due to osmosis. This in turn causes 
the mucus that coats certain cells to become thicker and 
stickier than normal and to build up in the pancreas, lungs, 
digestive tract, and other organs. Multiple (pleiotropic) effects 
result, including poor absorption of nutrients from the intes-
tines, chronic bronchitis, and recurrent bacterial infections.
Untreated, cystic fibrosis can cause death by the age of 5. 
Daily doses of antibiotics to stop infection, gentle pounding 
on the chest to clear mucus from clogged airways, and other 
therapies can prolong life. In the United States, more than 
half of those with cystic fibrosis now survive into their 40s.
Sickle-Cell Disease: A Genetic Disorder with 
Evolutionary Implications
EVOLUTION The most common inherited disorder among 
people of African descent is sickle-cell disease, which affects 
one out of 400 African-Americans. Sickle-cell disease is caused 
by the substitution of a single amino acid in the hemoglobin 
protein of red blood cells; in homozygous individuals, all 
hemoglobin is of the sickle-cell (abnormal) variety. When the 
oxygen content of an affected individual’s blood is low (at high 
altitudes or under physical stress, for instance), the sickle-cell 
hemoglobin proteins aggregate into long fibers that deform 
the red cells into a sickle shape (see Figure 5.19). Sickled cells 
may clump and clog small blood vessels, often leading to other 
symptoms throughout the body, including physical weakness, 
pain, organ damage, and even stroke and paralysis. Regular 
blood transfusions can ward off brain damage in children with 
Sickle-
cell
disease
Low
O2
Sickle-cell
hemoglobin
proteins
Part of a fiber of
sickle-cell hemo-
globin proteins
Part of a sickle-cell 
fiber and normal 
hemoglobin proteins
Sickle-cell alleles
Long fibers cause
red blood cells to 
be sickle-shaped
(a)Homozygote with sickle-cell disease: Weakness, anemia, 
pain and fever, organ damage
Sickle-
cell
trait
Very
low
O2
Sickle-cell
and normal
hemoglobin
proteins
Sickle-cell allele
Normal allele
Sickled
and normal 
red blood cells
(b)Heterozygote with sickle-cell trait: Some symptoms when 
blood oxygen is very low; reduction of malaria symptoms
. Figure 14.17 Sickle-cell disease and sickle-cell trait.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation:  
Sickle-Cell Disease 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   336 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 338 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 337
In these cases, the individual may already have transmitted 
the allele to his or her children. For example, a degenerative 
disease of the nervous system, called Huntington’s disease, 
is caused by a lethal dominant allele that has no obvious phe-
notypic effect until the individual is about 35 to 45 years old. 
Once the deterioration of the nervous system begins, it is irre-
versible and inevitably fatal. As with other dominant traits, 
a child born to a parent with the Huntington’s disease allele 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the allele and the disorder (see 
the Punnett square in Figure 14.18). In the United States, this 
disease afflicts about one in 10,000 people.
At one time, the onset of symptoms was the only way to 
know if a person had inherited the Huntington’s allele, but this 
is no longer the case. By analyzing DNA samples from a large 
family with a high incidence of the disorder, geneticists tracked 
the Huntington’s allele to a locus near the tip of chromosome 4, 
and the gene was sequenced in 1993. This information led to 
the development of a test that could detect the presence of the 
Huntington’s allele in an individual’s genome. (The methods 
that make such tests possible are discussed in Concepts 19.1 
and 19.4.) The availability of this test poses an agonizing 
dilemma for those with a family history of Huntington’s dis-
ease. Some individuals may want to be tested for this disease, 
whereas others may decide it would be too stressful to find out.
Thus, in tropical Africa, where infection with the malaria para-
site is common, the sickle-cell allele confers an advantage to 
heterozygotes even though it is harmful in the homozygous 
state. (The balance between these two effects will be discussed 
in Concept 23.4; see Make Connections Figure 23.18.) The 
relatively high frequency of African-Americans with sickle-cell 
trait is a vestige of their tropical African ancestry.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Making  
of the Fittest: Natural Selection in Humans  
(Sickle-Cell Disease) 
Dominantly Inherited Disorders
Although many harmful alleles are recessive, some disorders 
are due to dominant alleles. One example is achondroplasia, 
a form of dwarfism that occurs in one of every 25,000 peo-
ple. Heterozygous individuals have the dwarf phenotype 
(Figure 14.18). Therefore, all people who do not have 
achondroplasia—99.99% of the population—are homozygous 
recessive. Like the presence of extra fingers or toes mentioned 
earlier, achondroplasia is a trait for which the recessive allele is 
much more prevalent than the corresponding dominant allele.
Unlike achondroplasia, which is relatively harmless, some 
dominant alleles cause lethal diseases. Those that do are much 
less common than recessive alleles that have lethal effects. A 
lethal recessive allele is only lethal when homozygous; it can 
be passed from one generation to the next by heterozygous car-
riers because the carriers themselves have normal phenotypes. 
A lethal dominant allele, however, often causes the death of 
afflicted individuals before they can mature and reproduce, 
and in this case the allele is not passed on to future generations.
A lethal dominant allele may be passed on, though, if the 
lethal disease symptoms first appear after reproductive age. 
D
d
d
d
3
Normal
phenotype
dd
Parents
Dwarf 
phenotype
Dd
Sperm
Eggs Dd
Dwarf 
phenotype
dd
Normal
phenotype
Dd
Dwarf 
phenotype
dd
Normal
phenotype
. Figure 14.18 Achondroplasia: a dominant trait. Dr. Michael 
C. Ain has achondroplasia, a form of dwarfism caused by a dominant 
allele. This has inspired his work: He is a specialist in the repair of 
bone defects caused by achondroplasia and other disorders. The 
dominant allele (D) might have arisen as a mutation in the egg or 
sperm of a parent or could have been inherited from an affected 
parent, as shown for an affected father in the Punnett square.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Nancy Wexler: Mapping the 
gene that causes Huntington’s disease
Multifactorial Disorders
The hereditary diseases we have discussed so far are sometimes 
described as simple Mendelian disorders because they result 
from abnormality of one or both alleles at a single genetic 
locus. Many more people are susceptible to diseases that have 
a multifactorial basis—a genetic component plus a significant 
environmental influence. Heart disease, diabetes, cancer, 
alcoholism, certain mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and 
bipolar disorder, and many other diseases are multifactorial. In 
these cases, the hereditary component is polygenic. For exam-
ple, many genes affect cardiovascular health, making some 
of us more prone than others to heart attacks and strokes. No 
matter what our genotype, however, our lifestyle has a tremen-
dous effect on phenotype for cardiovascular health and other 
multifactorial characters. Exercise, a healthful diet, abstinence 
from smoking, and an ability to handle stressful situations all 
reduce our risk of heart disease and some types of cancer.
Genetic Testing and Counseling
Avoiding simple Mendelian disorders is possible when the 
risk of a particular genetic disorder can be assessed before a 
child is conceived or during the early stages of the pregnancy. 
Many hospitals have genetic counselors who can provide 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   337 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 339 ===

338 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
or cells from the inside of the cheek. Hundreds of different 
recessive alleles can be detected, including those for Tay-
Sachs disease, sickle-cell disease, and cystic fibrosis.
These tests for identifying carriers enable people with fam-
ily histories of genetic disorders to make informed decisions 
about having children, including whether to do genetic test-
ing of the fetus, should they decide to become pregnant. The 
results can also lead carriers to alert family members that they 
may also be carriers and might choose to be tested. The tests 
raise other issues as well: Could carriers be denied health or 
life insurance or lose the jobs providing those benefits, even 
though they themselves are healthy? The Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act, in place since 2008, allays these con-
cerns by prohibiting discrimination in employment or health 
insurance coverage based on genetic test results. This is an 
important act that protects patients’ rights but is unknown to 
many, including physicians. Genetic counselors, trained in a 
growing number of professional programs, can help individu-
als understand their genetic test results. Once test results are 
clearly understood, those with certain results may face diffi-
cult decisions. Advances in biotechnology offer the potential 
to reduce human suffering, but along with them come ethical 
issues that require conscientious deliberation.
Fetal Testing
Two types of testing can be done to look for genetic disorders in 
the fetus: screening tests and diagnostic tests. Screening tests are 
generally noninvasive and can be followed by diagnostic tests if 
screening results suggest that a genetic disorder might be pres-
ent or if there are other risks, as when both parents are carriers.
Screening tests include imaging and blood tests. Imaging 
techniques allow a physician to examine a fetus directly for 
major anatomical abnormalities that might not show up 
in genetic tests. In the ultrasound technique, for example, 
reflected sound waves are used to produce an image of the 
fetus by a simple noninvasive procedure. An ultrasound is 
often accompanied by a blood test that looks for fetal pro-
teins that might signal a genetic disorder.
Medical scientists have also developed methods for isolat-
ing and analyzing fetal DNA that has escaped into the mother’s 
blood (cell-free fetal DNA), using various techniques. Cell-free 
fetal DNA tests and other blood tests are increasingly being 
used as noninvasive prenatal screening tests for certain chro-
mosomal defects and disorders; a positive result indicates to the 
parents that further diagnostic testing should be considered.
One diagnostic test that can determine whether the devel-
oping fetus has a serious recessive disease is amniocentesis, 
which can be performed starting at the 15th or 16th week 
of pregnancy (Figure 14.19a). In this procedure, a physi-
cian inserts a needle into the uterus and extracts about 10 
mL of amniotic fluid, the liquid that bathes the fetus. Some 
genetic disorders can be detected from the presence of cer-
tain proteins or hormones in the amniotic fluid itself. Tests 
information to prospective parents concerned about a family 
history for a specific disease. Fetal and newborn testing can 
also reveal genetic disorders.
Counseling Based on Mendelian Genetics  
and Probability Rules
Consider the case of a hypothetical couple, Tyler and Lily. 
Each had a brother who died from the same recessively inher-
ited lethal disease. Before conceiving their first child, Tyler 
and Lily seek genetic counseling to determine the risk of 
having a child with the disease. From the information about 
their brothers, we know that both parents of Tyler and both 
parents of Lily must have been carriers of the recessive allele. 
Thus, Tyler and Lily are both products of Aa*Aa crosses, 
where a symbolizes the allele that causes this particular dis-
ease. We also know that Tyler and Lily are not homozygous 
recessive (aa) because they do not have the disease. Therefore, 
their genotypes are either AA or Aa.
Given a genotypic ratio of 1 AA : 2 Aa : 1 aa for offspring 
of an Aa*Aa cross, Tyler and Lily each have a 2⁄3 chance of 
being carriers (Aa). According to the rule of multiplication, 
the overall probability of their firstborn having the disorder 
is 2⁄3 (the chance that Tyler is a carrier) times 2⁄3 (the chance 
that Lily is a carrier) times 1⁄4 (the chance of two carriers 
having a child with the disease), which equals 1⁄9. Suppose 
that Lily and Tyler decide to have a child—after all, there is 
an 8⁄9 chance that their baby will not have the disorder. If, 
despite these odds, their child is born with the disease, then 
we would know that both Tyler and Lily are, in fact, carriers 
(Aa genotype). If both Tyler and Lily are carriers, there is a 1⁄4 
chance that any subsequent child this couple has will have 
the disease. The probability is higher for subsequent children 
because the diagnosis of the disease in the first child estab-
lished that both parents are carriers, not because the genotype 
of the first child affects in any way that of future children.
When we use Mendel’s laws to predict possible outcomes 
of matings, it is important to remember that each child rep-
resents an independent event in the sense that its genotype 
is unaffected by the genotypes of older siblings. Suppose 
that Tyler and Lily have three more children, and all three 
have the hypothetical hereditary disease. There is only 
one chance in 64 (1⁄4*1⁄4*1⁄4) that such an outcome will 
occur. Despite these circumstances, the chance that a fourth 
child of this couple will have the disease remains 1⁄4.
Tests for Identifying Carriers
Most children with recessive disorders are born to parents 
with normal phenotypes. The key to accurately assessing the 
genetic risk for a particular disease is therefore to find out 
whether the prospective parents are heterozygous carriers of 
the recessive allele. Tests are available that can distinguish 
individuals of normal phenotype who are dominant homozy-
gotes from those who are heterozygous carriers, using blood 
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   338 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 340 ===

 C H A P T E R  14  Mendelian Genetics 339
may also be offered to younger women if there are risk factors or 
conditions suggested by family history. If the fetal tests reveal 
a serious disorder, the parents face the difficult choice of either 
terminating the pregnancy or preparing to care for a child with a 
genetic disorder, one that might even be fatal. Parental and fetal 
screening for Tay-Sachs alleles done since 1980 has reduced the 
number of children born with this incurable disease by 90%.
Newborn Screening
Some genetic diseases and disorders can be detected at birth 
by simple biochemical tests that are routinely performed on 
blood from the baby’s heel in most hospitals in the United 
States. One common screening program is for phenylketon-
uria (PKU), a recessively inherited disorder that occurs in 
about one out of every 10,000–15,000 births in the United 
States. Children with this disease cannot properly metabolize 
the amino acid phenylalanine. This compound and its by-
product, phenylpyruvate, can accumulate to toxic levels in 
the blood, causing severe intellectual disability. However, if 
PKU is detected in the newborn, a special diet low in phenyl-
alanine will usually allow for typical development. (Among 
many other substances, this diet excludes the artificial sweet-
ener aspartame, which contains phenylalanine.)
The number of newborn genetic tests, many for metabolic 
disorders or enzyme deficiencies, is over 100 and ever-increasing; 
for thousands of other disorders (such as cystic fibrosis) are 
performed on DNA from fetal cells sloughed off into the 
amniotic fluid using targeted DNA sequencing or a technique 
called a DNA microarray (see Figure 19.13) that tests for many 
alleles at the same time. A karyotype of these cultured cells 
can also confirm certain chromosomal defects that may not 
have been suggested by cell-free fetal DNA tests.
In an alternative diagnostic technique that is called 
chorionic villus sampling (CVS), a physician inserts a nar-
row tube through the cervix into the uterus and suctions out a 
tiny sample of tissue from the placenta, the organ that transmits 
nutrients and fetal wastes between the fetus and the mother 
(Figure 14.19b). The cells of the chorionic villi of the placenta—
the portion sampled—are derived from the fetus and have 
the same genotype and DNA sequence as the new individual. 
DNA from these cells can be analyzed for the presence of many 
genetic disorders. The main advantage of CVS is that it can be 
performed as early as the 10th or 11th week of pregnancy.
Ultrasound and isolation of fetal cells or DNA from mater-
nal blood pose no known risk to either mother or fetus, while 
amniocentesis and CVS can cause complications in a small per-
centage of cases (for both, between 1 in 1,000 and 1 in 500 cases). 
Amniocentesis or CVS for diagnostic testing is generally offered 
to women over age 35, due to their increased risk of bearing a 
child with Down syndrome or other chromosomal disorders, and 
(a) Amniocentesis (b) Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)
A sample of 
amniotic fluid can 
be taken starting at 
the 15th or 16th week 
of pregnancy.
A sample of chorionic 
villus tissue can be 
taken as early as
the 10th or 11th week 
of pregnancy.
1 1Amniotic fluid
withdrawn
Centrifugation
Cervix
Cervix
Genetic (including
DNA-based) and
biochemical tests
Karyotype
Cell culture
Fetus
Ultrasound
monitor
Ultrasound
monitor
Placenta
Uterus
Fetus
Suction tube
inserted through
cervix
Uterus
Placenta
Chorionic
villi
Fetal
cells
Fetal
cellsAmniotic
fluid
Genetic and biochemical tests
are performed on the amniotic 
fluid and fetal cells in it.
If indicated, fetal cells from 
either amniocentesis or CVS 
can be cultured and then 
karyotyped to check for 
large-scale chromosomal 
abnormalities.
2
3
Genetic and biochemical tests are 
performed on the fetal cells.  
2
33
. Figure 14.19 Diagnostic fetal testing for genetic disorders. Most testing for genetic abnormalities 
is now DNA-based. In some cases biochemical tests are used to detect particular disorders, and karyotyping 
may be done to see whether the chromosomes of the fetus are normal in number and appearance.
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   339 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 341 ===

each state regulates which tests are used. If screening identi-
fies a baby with a disease or disorder for which treatment can 
be started early on, that individual has improved chances 
for better life quality. Some diseases, like PKU, are treated by 
dietary changes and others by replacement of missing enzymes. 
Unfortunately, there are quite a few diseases for which no treat-
ment is yet known.
Fetal and newborn screening for serious inherited 
diseases, tests for identifying carriers, and genetic counsel-
ing all rely on the Mendelian model of inheritance. We owe 
the “gene idea”—the concept of heritable factors transmit-
ted according to simple rules of chance—to the elegant 
quantitative experiments of Gregor Mendel. The importance 
of his discoveries was overlooked by most biologists until 
the early 1900s, decades after he reported his findings. In 
the next chapter, you will learn how Mendel’s laws have 
their physical basis in the behavior of chromosomes during 
sexual life cycles and how the synthesis of Mendelian genet-
ics and a chromosome theory of inheritance catalyzed 
progress in genetics.
1. Lucia and Jared each have a sibling with cystic fibrosis, but 
neither Lucia nor Jared nor any of their parents have the 
disease. Calculate the probability that if this couple has a 
child, the child will have cystic fibrosis. What would be the 
probability if a test revealed that Jared is a carrier but Lucia 
is not? Explain your answers.
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how the change of a single 
amino acid in hemoglobin leads to the aggregation of 
hemoglobin into long fibers. (Review Figures 5.14, 5.18, 
and 5.19.)
3. Idris lives in Nigeria with his family. His elder sister suffers 
from malaria, but he and his parents do not. They do not 
have any other remarkable disease. What is causing this dif-
ference in sensitivity to malaria in the family? What is the 
probability that a future sibling of Idris will be sensitive to 
malaria?
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS In Table 14.1, note the phenotypic 
ratio of the dominant to recessive trait in the F2 generation 
for the monohybrid cross involving flower color. Then deter-
mine the phenotypic ratio for the offspring of the second-
generation couple in Figure 14.15b. What accounts for the 
difference in the two ratios?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
14 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 14.1
Mendel used the scientific approach to identify two 
laws of inheritance (pp. 320–326)
• Gregor Mendel formulated a theory of inheritance based on ex-
periments with garden peas, proposing that parents pass on to 
their offspring discrete genes that retain their identity through 
generations. This theory includes two “laws.”
• The law of segregation states that genes have alternative 
forms, or alleles. In a diploid organism, the two alleles of a gene 
segregate (separate) during meiosis and gamete formation; each 
sperm or egg carries only one allele of each pair. This law explains 
the 3:1 ratio of F2 phenotypes observed when monohybrids 
cross-or self-pollinate. Each organism inherits one allele for each 
gene from each parent. In heterozygotes, the two alleles are 
different: Expression of the dominant allele masks the pheno-
typic effect of the recessive allele. Homozygotes have identi-
cal alleles of a given gene and are therefore true-breeding.
• The law of independent assortment states that the pair of 
alleles for a given gene segregates into gametes independently 
of the pair of alleles for any other gene. In a cross between 
dihybrids (individuals heterozygous for two genes), the 
offspring have four phenotypes in a 9:3:3:1 ratio.
? When Mendel did crosses of true-breeding purple- and white-
flowered pea plants, the white-flowered trait disappeared from the F1 
generation but reappeared in the F2 generation. Use genetic terms to 
explain why that happened.
CONCEPT 14.2
Probability laws govern Mendelian inheritance  
(pp. 326–328)
• The multiplication rule states that the probability of two or 
more events occurring together (a statement using and) is equal 
to the product of the individual probabilities of the indepen-
dent single events. The addition rule states that the prob-
ability of an event that can occur in two or more independent, 
mutually exclusive ways (using or) is the sum of the individual 
probabilities.
• The rules of probability can be used to solve complex genetics 
problems. A dihybrid or other multicharacter cross is equiva-
lent to two or more independent monohybrid crosses occur-
ring simultaneously. In calculating the chances of the various 
offspring genotypes from such crosses, each character is first 
considered separately and then the individual probabilities are 
multiplied.
DRAW IT Redraw the Punnett square on the right side of Figure 14.8 
as two smaller monohybrid Punnett squares, one for each gene. Below 
each square, list the fractions of each phenotype produced. Use the rule 
of multiplication to compute the overall fraction of each of the possible 
dihybrid phenotypes. What is the phenotypic ratio?
1212
Segregation of
alleles into sperm Sperm 
Rr
r
R
CONCEPT CHECK 14.4
340 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   340 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 342 ===

 CHAPTER 14  Mendelian Genetics 341
CONCEPT 14.3
Inheritance patterns are often more complex than 
predicted by simple Mendelian genetics (pp. 328–333)
• Extensions of Mendelian genetics for a single gene:
• Extensions of Mendelian genetics for two or more genes:
• The expression of a genotype can be affected by environmental 
influences, resulting in a range of phenotypes. Polygenic char-
acters that are also influenced by the environment are called 
multifactorial characters.
• An organism’s overall phenotype reflects its overall genotype and 
unique environmental history. Even in more complex inheri-
tance patterns, Mendel’s fundamental laws still apply.
? Which genetic relationships listed in the first column of the two tables 
above are demonstrated by the inheritance pattern of the ABO blood 
group alleles? For each genetic relationship, explain why this inheritance 
pattern is or is not an example.
CONCEPT 14.4
Many human traits follow Mendelian patterns of 
inheritance (pp. 334–340)
• Analysis of family pedigrees can be used to deduce the possible gen-
otypes of individuals and make predictions about future offspring. 
Such predictions are statistical probabilities rather than certainties.
Widow’s peak No widow’s peak
Ww Ww
Ww
WW
or
Ww
Ww Wwww ww
ww
ww
ww ww
• Many genetic disorders are inherited as simple recessive traits. 
Most affected (homozygous recessive) individuals are children of 
phenotypically normal, heterozygous carriers.
• The sickle-cell allele has probably persisted for evolutionary rea-
sons: Homozygotes have sickle-cell disease, but heterozygotes 
have an advantage because one copy of the sickle-cell allele re-
duces both the frequency and severity of malaria attacks.
Sickle-
cell
disease
Low
O2
Sickle-cell
hemoglobin
proteins
Part of a fiber of
sickle-cell hemo-
globin proteins
Sickle-cell alleles
Long fibers cause  
red blood cells to 
be sickle-shaped
• Lethal dominant alleles are eliminated from the population if af-
fected people die before reproducing. Nonlethal dominant alleles 
and lethal ones that strike relatively late in life can be inherited in 
a Mendelian way.
• Many human diseases are multifactorial—that is, they have both 
genetic and environmental components and do not follow simple 
Mendelian inheritance patterns.
• Using family histories, genetic counselors help couples determine 
the probability that their children will have genetic disorders. 
Genetic testing of prospective parents can reveal whether they 
are carriers of recessive alleles associated with specific disorders. 
Ultrasounds and blood tests can screen for certain disorders in a 
fetus. Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling can di-
agnose whether a suspected genetic disorder is present in a fetus. 
Other genetic tests can be performed after birth.
? Both members of a couple know that they are carriers of the cystic 
fibrosis allele. None of their three children have cystic fibrosis, but any 
one of them might be a carrier. The couple would like to have a fourth 
child but are worried that he or she would very likely have the disease, 
since the first three do not. What would you tell the couple? Would it 
remove some uncertainty from their prediction if they could find out 
whether the three children are carriers?
Complete dominance 
of one allele
Incomplete dominance 
of either allele
Codominance
Multiple alleles
Pleiotropy
Heterozygous phenotype
same as that of homo-
zygous dominant
PP Pp
CRCR
IAIB
IA, IB, i
CRCWCWCW
Heterozygous phenotype
intermediate between
the two homozygous
phenotypes
Both phenotypes 
expressed in 
heterozygotes
ABO blood group alleles
Sickle-cell disease
In the population, 
some genes have more
than two alleles
One gene affects 
multiple phenotypic
characters
Relationship among
alleles of a single gene Description Example
BE
BE
bE
Be
be
BbEe BbEe
bE Be be
3
AaBbCc AaBbCc3
9
Epistasis
Polygenic inheritance
The phenotypic
expression of one 
gene affects the 
expression of 
another gene
A single phenotypic
character is affected by
two or more genes
Relationship among
two or more genes Description Example
: 3 : 4
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   341 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 343 ===

342 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
TIPS FOR GENETICS PROBLEMS
1. Write down symbols for the alleles. (These may be given in the 
problem.) When represented by single letters, the dominant 
allele is uppercase and the recessive is lowercase.
2. Write down the possible genotypes, as determined by the 
phenotype.
a. If the phenotype is that of the dominant trait (for example, 
purple flowers), then the genotype is either homozygous domi-
nant or heterozygous (PP or Pp in this example).
b. If the phenotype is that of the recessive trait, the genotype 
must be homozygous recessive (for example, pp).
c. If the problem says “true-breeding,” the genotype is homozygous.
3. Determine what the problem is asking for. If asked to do a cross, 
write it out in the form 3genotype4*3genotype4, using the 
alleles you’ve decided on.
4. To figure out the outcome of a cross, set up a Punnett square.
a. Put the gametes of one parent at the top and those of the other 
on the left. To determine the allele(s) in each gamete for a 
given genotype, set up a systematic way to list all the possibili-
ties. (Remember, each gamete has one allele of each gene.) 
Note that there are 2n possible types of gametes, where n is the 
number of gene loci that are heterozygous. For example, an 
individual with genotype AaBbCc would produce 23= 8 types 
of gametes. Write the genotypes of the gametes in circles above 
the columns and to the left of the rows.
b. Fill in the Punnett square as if each possible sperm were fertil-
izing each possible egg, making all of the possible offspring. In 
a cross of AaBbCc*AaBbCc, for example, the Punnett square 
would have 8 columns and 8 rows, so there are 64 different 
offspring; you would know the genotype of each and thus the 
phenotype. Count genotypes and phenotypes to obtain the 
genotypic and phenotypic ratios. Because the Punnett square is 
so large, this method is not the most efficient. See tip 5.
5. Y ou can use the rules of probability if a Punnett square would be 
too big. (For example, see the question at the end of the summary 
for Concept 1 4.2 and question 7 below.) Y ou can consider each 
gene separately (see the section Solving Complex Genetics 
Problems with the Rules of Probability in Concept 14.2).
6. If the problem gives you the phenotypic ratios of offspring but 
not the genotypes of the parents in a given cross, the phenotypes 
can help you deduce the parents’ unknown genotypes.
a. For example, if 1⁄2 of the offspring have the recessive phenotype 
and 1⁄2 the dominant, you know that the cross was between a 
heterozygote and a homozygous recessive.
b. If the ratio is 3:1, the cross was between two heterozygotes.
c. If two genes are involved and you see a 9:3:3:1 ratio in the 
offspring, you know that each parent is heterozygous for both 
genes. Caution: Don’t assume that the reported numbers will 
exactly equal the predicted ratios. For example, if there are 13 
offspring with the dominant trait and 1 1 with the recessive, as-
sume that the ratio is one dominant to one recessive.
7. For pedigree problems, use the tips in Figure 14.15 and below to 
determine what kind of trait is involved.
a. If parents without the trait have offspring with the trait, the 
trait must be recessive and the parents both carriers.
b. If the trait is seen in every generation, it is most likely domi-
nant (see the next possibility, though).
c. If both parents have the trait, then in order for it to be reces-
sive, all offspring must show the trait.
d. To determine the likely genotype of a certain individual in a 
pedigree, first label the genotypes of all the family members 
you can. Even if some of the genotypes are incomplete, label 
what you do know. For example, if an individual has the domi-
nant phenotype, the genotype must be AA or Aa; you can write 
this as A–. Try different possibilities to see which fits the results. 
Use the rules of probability to calculate the probability of each 
possible genotype being the correct one.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
1. DRAW IT A pea plant heterozygous for inflated pods (Ii) is 
crossed with a plant homozygous for constricted pods (ii). 
Draw a Punnett square for this cross to predict genotypic and 
phenotypic ratios. Assume that pollen comes from the ii plant.
2. A couple, both with type A blood, has one child with type A 
blood and another with type O blood. What are the genotypes 
of these four individuals? What is the probability of each child 
having a child in the future with type O blood if each of them 
marries a person with type O blood?
3. A man has two copies of the defective gene for Huntington’s 
disease. His wife is not a carrier. What is the probability that 
their daughter will have the disease?
4. DRAW IT T wo pea plants heterozygous for the characters of pod 
color and pod shape are crossed. (See Table 14.1.) Draw a Punnett 
square to determine the phenotypic ratios of the offspring.
5. Flower position, stem length, and seed shape are three characters 
that Mendel studied. Each is controlled by an independently 
assorting gene and has dominant and recessive expression as 
indicated in Table 14.1. If a plant that is heterozygous for all three 
characters is allowed to self-fertilize, what proportion of the 
offspring would you expect to be each of the following? (Note: 
Use the rules of probability instead of a huge Punnett square.)
(a) homozygous for the three dominant traits
(b) homozygous for the three recessive traits
(c) heterozygous for all three characters
(d) homozygous for axial and tall, heterozygous for seed shape
6. Werner syndrome is an inherited disease caused by a recessive 
allele. If a woman and her husband, who are both carriers, 
have monozygotic twin children, what is the probability of 
each of the following?
(a) One of the children has the disease.
(b) Both children have the disease.
(c) What would be the answers for (a) and (b) if the twins were 
dizygotic?
(Note: Monozygotic twins develop from the same egg and 
sperm. Dizygotic twins develop from separate eggs fertilized by 
separate sperm, hence they are genetically different.)
7. The genotype of F1 individuals in a tetrahybrid cross is 
AaBbCcDd. Assuming independent assortment of these four 
genes, what are the probabilities that F2 offspring will have the 
following genotypes?
(a) aabbccdd
(b) AaBbCcDd
(c) AABBCCDD
(d) AaBBccDd
(e) AaBBCCdd
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   342 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 344 ===

 CHAPTER 14  Mendelian Genetics 343
tested and has not been found to be a carrier. What is the 
probability that Mary is a carrier? What is the probability that 
Mary and John will have a baby with albinism?
15. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Natural selection eliminates 
individuals with unfavorable phenotypes from a population. 
However, a number of harmful mutant alleles, particularly in 
heterozygous individuals, are retained in a gene pool. How may 
this provide an advantage to the heterozygotes?
16. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Y ou are handed a mystery pea plant with 
tall stems and axial flowers and asked to determine its genotype 
as quickly as possible. Y ou know that the allele for tall stems (T) 
is dominant to that for dwarf stems (t) and that the allele for 
axial flowers (A) is dominant to that for terminal flowers (a).
(a) Identify all the possible genotypes for your mystery plant.
(b) Describe the one cross you would do in your garden to de-
termine the exact genotype of your mystery plant.
(c) While waiting for the results of your cross, you predict the re-
sults for each possible genotype listed in part a. Explain how 
you do this and why this is not called “performing a cross.”
(d) Explain how the results of your cross and your predictions 
will help you learn the genotype of your mystery plant.
17. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION The continuity of 
life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA. In a 
short essay (100–150 words), explain how the passage of genes 
from parents to offspring, in the form of particular alleles, 
ensures perpetuation of parental traits in offspring and, at the 
same time, genetic variation among offspring. Use genetic 
terms in your explanation.
18. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Just for fun, imagine that “shirt-striping” is a phenotypic character 
caused by a single gene. Construct a genetic explanation for the 
appearance of the family in the above photograph, consistent 
with their “shirt phenotypes.” Include in your answer the 
presumed allele combinations for “shirt-striping” in each family 
member. Identify the inheritance pattern shown by the child.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
8. What is the probability that each of the following pairs 
of parents will produce the indicated offspring? (Assume 
independent assortment of all gene pairs.)
(a) AABBCC*aabbccSAaBbCc
(b) AABbCc*AaBbCcSAAbbCC
(c) AaBbCc*AaBbCcSAaBbCc
(d) aaBbCC*AABbccSAaBbCc
9. Keisha and Jerome each have a sibling with sickle-cell 
disease. Neither Keisha nor Jerome nor any of their parents 
have the disease, and none of them have ever been tested 
to see if they carry the sickle-cell allele. Based on this 
incomplete information, calculate the probability that if 
this couple has a child, the child will have sickle-cell disease.
10. In 1981, a stray black cat 
with unusual rounded, 
curled-back ears was adopted 
by a family in California. 
Thousands of descendants 
of the cat have since been 
born, and cat fanciers have 
developed the curl cat into 
a show breed. Suppose you 
owned the first curl cat and 
wanted to develop a true-breeding variety. How would you 
determine whether the curl allele is dominant or recessive? 
How would you obtain true-breeding curl cats? How could 
you be sure they are true-breeding?
11. In tigers, a recessive allele of a particular gene causes both 
an absence of fur pigmentation (a white tiger) and a cross-
eyed condition. If two phenotypically normal tigers that are 
heterozygous at this locus are mated, what percentage of their 
offspring will be cross-eyed? What percentage of tigers with 
crossed eyes will also be white?
12. In maize (corn) plants, a dominant allele I inhibits kernel color, 
while the recessive allele i permits color when homozygous. 
At a different locus, the dominant allele P causes purple kernel 
color, while the homozygous recessive genotype pp causes red 
kernels. If plants heterozygous at both loci are crossed, what 
will be the phenotypic ratio of the offspring?
13. The pedigree below traces the inheritance of alkaptonuria, 
a biochemical disorder. Affected individuals, indicated here 
by the colored circles and squares, are unable to metabolize a 
substance called alkapton, which colors the urine and stains 
body tissues. Does alkaptonuria appear to be caused by a 
dominant allele or by a recessive allele? Fill in the genotypes 
of the individuals whose genotypes can be deduced. What 
genotypes are possible for each of the other individuals?
Jorge
BenitoMariposa Diego
Julio PalomaHector
Roberto
Carmen
Carlota
MiguelElena
Ariana
14. Imagine that you are a genetic counselor, and a couple 
planning to start a family comes to you for information. 
Mary’s brother has albinism. Her husband, John, has been 
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
What genes affect skin color? Go to “ A Golden Fish Reveals  
Pigmentation Loss in Europeans” at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C14_PRF.indd   343 3/21/20   1:32 AM

=== SIDE 345 ===

Figure 15.1 The four yellow dots mark the locations of a specific gene, tagged with 
a fluorescent yellow dye, on a pair of homologous chromosomes. The chromosomes 
have duplicated, so each chromosome has two sister chromatids, each with a copy of 
the gene. This provides a visual demonstration that genes—Mendel’s “factors”—are 
segments of DNA located along chromosomes.
Linkage and Chromosomes15
What is the relationship between genes and chromosomes?
Genes are located on 
chromosomes. In diploid 
cells, chromosomes and 
genes are present in pairs.
Chromosomes duplicate 
before cell division. Each 
duplicated chromosome 
has two copies of each allele, 
one on each sister chromatid.
During meiosis I, homologous 
chromosomes separate and 
alleles segregate. In meiosis II, 
sister chromatids separate.
Genes are passed on as discrete 
units. Each chromosome 
has one version of a gene 
(one allele).
Offspring inherit 
one allele from
each parent.
Chromosome Pair of
homologous
chromosomes
Alleles
(alternative
versions of
a gene)
Pair of homologous
chromosomes
(one from each parent)
Meiosis I
and II
Fertilization
Maternal cell Paternal cell
Paternal
chromosome
Sister
chromatids
of one
duplicated
chromosome
Maternal
chromosome
SpermEgg
Homologous chromosomes 
each have one allele of a 
given gene at the same 
locus. The chromosomes
in this example have 
different alleles.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 15
• Animation: The Chromosomal Basis of 
Independent Assortment
• Animation: Linked Genes and Crossing Over
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Pedigrees and Sex-Linkage
• Tutorial: Recombination and Linkage Mapping
15.1 Mendelian inheritance has its 
physical basis in the behavior of 
chromosomes p. 345
15.2 Sex-linked genes exhibit unique 
patterns of inheritance p. 348
15.3 Linked genes tend to be inherited 
together because they are located 
near each other on the same 
chromosome p. 351
15.4 Alterations of chromosome number 
or structure cause some genetic 
disorders p. 356
15.5 Some inheritance patterns are 
exceptions to standard Mendelian 
inheritance p. 360
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Draw chromosomes: As you work on the 
figure legend questions in this chapter, draw 
the chromosomes for the crosses described 
in the questions. Below is a starting sketch 
for the What If? question that follows 
Figure 15.3. (Here you are including sex 
chromosomes to keep track of the offspring.)
w+
w+
w
X
X
wP
Generation
F1
Generation
X
Y
Y
w+
X
w
X
Eggs
Spermw
344
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   344 14/03/20   2:01 AM

=== SIDE 346 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 345
inspecting large numbers of offspring in search of naturally 
occurring variant individuals. After many months of this, he 
complained, “Two years’ work wasted. I have been breeding 
those flies for all that time and I’ve got nothing out of it.” 
Morgan persisted, however, and was finally rewarded with 
the discovery of a single male fly with white eyes instead 
of the usual red. The phenotype for a character most com-
monly observed in natural populations, such as red eyes 
in Drosophila, is called the wild type (Figure 15.2). Traits 
that are alternatives to the wild type, such as white eyes in 
Drosophila, are called mutant phenotypes because they are due 
to alleles assumed to have originated as changes, or muta-
tions, in the wild-type allele.
Morgan and his students invented a notation for symbol-
izing alleles in Drosophila that is still widely used for fruit 
flies. For a given character in flies, the gene takes its symbol 
from the first mutant (non–wild type) discovered. Thus, the 
allele for white eyes in Drosophila is symbolized by w. A super-
script + identifies the allele for the wild-type trait: w+ for the 
allele for red eyes, for example. Over the years, a variety of 
gene notation systems have been developed for different 
organisms. For example, human genes are usually writ-
ten in all capitals, such as HTT for the gene involved in 
Huntington’s disease. (More than one letter may be used for 
an allele, as in HTT.)
Correlating Behavior of a Gene’s Alleles  
with Behavior of a Chromosome Pair: 
Scientific Inquiry
Morgan mated his white-eyed male fly with a red-eyed 
female. All the F1 offspring had red eyes, suggesting that the 
wild-type allele is dominant. When Morgan bred the F1 flies 
to each other, he observed the classical 3:1 phenotypic ratio 
among the F2 offspring. However, there was a surprising addi-
tional result: The white-eye trait showed up only in males. 
All the F2 females had red eyes, while half the males had red 
eyes and half had white eyes. Therefore, Morgan concluded 
Mendelian inheritance has its 
physical basis in the behavior  
of chromosomes
When Gregor Mendel proposed the existence of “hereditary 
factors” in 1860, no cellular structures had been identified 
that could house these imaginary units, and most biologists 
were skeptical. When the processes of mitosis and meiosis 
were worked out later that century, biologists saw parallels 
between the behavior of Mendel’s proposed factors (genes) 
during sexual life cycles and the behavior of chromosomes: 
As shown in Figure 15.1, chromosomes and genes are both 
present in pairs in diploid cells, and homologous chromo-
somes separate and alleles segregate during the process of 
meiosis. After meiosis, fertilization restores the paired condi-
tion for both chromosomes and genes. Around 1902, Walter S. 
Sutton, Theodor Boveri, and others independently noted these 
parallels and began to develop the chromosome theory of 
inheritance. According to this theory, Mendelian genes have 
specific loci (sites) along chromosomes, and it is the chromo-
somes that undergo segregation and independent assortment.
The first solid evidence associating a specific gene with a 
specific chromosome came early in the 1900s from the work 
of Thomas Hunt Morgan, an experimental embryologist at 
Columbia University. Although Morgan was initially doubtful 
about both Mendelian genetics and the chromosome theory, 
his early experiments provided convincing evidence that chro-
mosomes are indeed the location of Mendel’s heritable factors.
Morgan’s Choice of Experimental Organism
Many times in the history of biology, important discoveries 
have come to those insightful or lucky enough to choose an 
experimental organism suitable for the research problem being 
tackled. Mendel chose the garden pea because a number of 
distinct varieties were available. For his work, Morgan selected 
a species of fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, a common insect 
that feeds on the fungi growing on fruit. Fruit flies are prolific 
breeders; a single mating will produce hundreds of offspring, 
and a new generation can be bred every two weeks. Morgan’s 
laboratory began using this convenient organism for genetic 
studies in 1907 and soon became known as “the fly room.”
Another advantage of the fruit fly is that it has only four 
pairs of chromosomes, which are easily distinguishable with 
a light microscope. There are three pairs of autosomes and 
one pair of sex chromosomes. Female fruit flies have a pair of 
homologous X chromosomes, and males have one X chromo-
some and one Y chromosome.
While Mendel could readily obtain different pea varieties 
from seed suppliers, Morgan was probably the first person to 
want different varieties of the fruit fly. He faced the tedious 
task of carrying out many matings and then microscopically 
CONCEPT 15.1
Wild type (red eyes) Mutant (white eyes)
. Figure 15.2 Morgan’s first mutant. Wild-type Drosophila flies 
have red eyes (left). Among his flies, Morgan discovered a mutant 
male with white eyes (right). This variation made it possible for 
Morgan to trace a gene for eye color to a specific chromosome.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   345 14/03/20   2:01 AM

=== SIDE 347 ===

346 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
that somehow a fly’s eye color was linked to its sex. (If the eye 
color gene were unrelated to sex, half of the white-eyed flies 
would have been female.)
Recall that a female fly has two X chromosomes (XX), 
while a male fly has an X and a Y (XY). The correlation 
between the trait of white eye color and the male sex of the 
affected F2 flies suggested to Morgan that the gene involved 
in his white-eyed mutant was located exclusively on the X 
chromosome, with no corresponding allele present on the Y 
chromosome. His reasoning can be followed in Figure 15.3. 
For a male, a single copy of the mutant allele would confer 
white eyes; since a male has only one X chromosome, there 
can be no wild-type allele (w+) present to mask the recessive 
allele. However, a female could have white eyes only if both 
her X chromosomes carried the recessive mutant allele (w). 
This was impossible for the F2 females in Morgan’s experi-
ment because all the F1 fathers had red eyes, so each F2 female 
received a w+ allele on the X chromosome inherited from 
her father.
Morgan’s finding of the correlation between a particular 
trait and an individual’s sex provided support for the chro-
mosome theory of inheritance: namely, that a specific gene 
is carried on a specific chromosome. In this case, an eye color 
gene is carried on the X chromosome.
Figure 15.4 illustrates the relationship between the 
chromosome theory of inheritance and Mendel’s laws. The 
separation of homologs during anaphase I accounts for the 
segregation of the two alleles of a gene into separate gametes, 
and the random arrangement of chromosome pairs at meta-
phase I accounts for independent assortment of the alleles for 
two or more genes located on different homolog pairs. This 
figure traces the same dihybrid pea cross you learned about 
in Figure 14.8. By carefully studying Figure 15.4, you can see 
how the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis in the F1 
generation and subsequent random fertilization give rise to 
the F2 phenotypic ratio observed by Mendel.
In addition to showing that a specific gene is carried on a 
specific chromosome, Morgan’s work indicated that genes 
located on a sex chromosome exhibit unique inheritance pat-
terns, which we will discuss in the next section. Recognizing 
the importance of Morgan’s early work, many bright students 
were attracted to his fly room.
Experiment Thomas Hunt Morgan wanted to analyze the 
behavior of two alleles of a fruit fly eye color gene. In crosses 
similar to those done by Mendel with pea plants, Morgan 
and his colleagues mated a wild-type (red-eyed) female with 
a mutant white-eyed male.
P
Generation
F1
Generation All offspring
had red eyes.
3
Morgan then bred an F1 red-eyed female to an F1 red-eyed 
male to produce the F2 generation.
Results T h e  F2 generation showed a typical Mendelian ratio 
of 3 red-eyed flies: 1 white-eyed fly. However, all white-eyed 
flies were males; no females displayed the white-eye trait.
F2
Generation
Conclusion A l l  F1 offspring had red eyes, so the mutant 
white-eye trait (w) must be recessive to the wild-type red-
eye trait (w+). Since the recessive trait—white eyes—was ex-
pressed only in males in the F2 generation, Morgan deduced 
that this eye color gene is located on the X chromosome and 
that there is no corresponding locus on the Y chromosome.
F1
Generation
F2
Generation
P
Generation
X
X
X
Sperm
Sperm
Eggs
Eggs
w1
w1 w1
w
w1
w1
w1
ww
w1
w1
w1
w1
w1
w
w
w
Y3
Data from T. H. Morgan, Sex-limited inheritance in Drosophila, Science 32: 
120–122 (1910).
 Instructors: A related Experimental Inquiry Tutorial can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
WHAT IF? Suppose this eye color gene were located on an autosome 
rather than a sex chromosome. Predict the phenotypes (including sex) of 
the F2 flies in this hypothetical cross. (Hint: Draw Punnett squares, including 
chromosomes, for the F1 and F2 generations; see the Study Tip.)
In a cross between a wild-type female fruit fly 
and a mutant white-eyed male, what color eyes 
will the F1 and F2 offspring have?
/uni25BC Figure 15.3 Inquiry
CONCEPT CHECK 15.1
1. WHAT IF? Propose a possible reason that the first naturally 
occurring mutant fruit fly Morgan saw involved a gene on a 
sex chromosome and was found in a male.
2. Why is the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster a good model 
organism for genetic studies?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the description of meiosis 
(see Figure 13.8) and Mendel’s laws of segregation and inde-
pendent assortment (see Concept 14.1). What is the physical 
basis for each of Mendel’s laws?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   346 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 348 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 347
Y y
yRY r
ry
rR
Y
R
P Generation Yellow round
seeds (YYRR)
Green wrinkled
seeds (yyrr)
All F1 plants produce
yellow round seeds (YyRr).
Gametes
Gametes
Meiosis
Meiosis
Fertilization
Starting with two true-breeding pea 
plants, we will follow two genes 
through the F1 and F2 generations. 
The two genes specify seed color 
(allele Y for yellow and allele y for 
green) and seed shape (allele R for 
round and allele r for wrinkled). These 
two genes are on different chromo- 
some pairs. (Peas have seven 
chromosome pairs, but only 
two pairs are illustrated here.)
LAW OF SEGREGATION
The two alleles for each gene separate 
during gamete formation. As an 
example, follow the fate of the long  
chromosome pair (carrying R and r). 
Read the numbered explanations 
below.
The R and r alleles segregate 
at anaphase I, yielding two 
types of daughter cells for 
this gene.
LAW OF INDEPENDENT ASSORTMENT 
Alleles of genes on nonhomologous 
chromosomes assort independently during 
gamete formation. As an example, follow 
both the long and short chromosome pair 
along both paths. Read the numbered 
explanations below.
R
y
Y
r
R
y
Y
r
R Two equally
probable
arrangements
of chromosomes
at metaphase I
r
Y
R
y
y
R
Y
rr
y
R
Y
Y
RR
y
y Y Y
r r r R
y
Rr
Y
9 : 3 : 3 :  1
YR yr Yr yR
Anaphase I
Metaphase II
yY
rR
yY
Rr
An F1 3 F1 cross-fertilization
1
Each gamete 
gets one long 
chromosome 
with either the 
R or r allele.
2
3
Alleles of each gene segregate in 
anaphase I, yielding four types of 
daughter cells, depending on the 
chromosome arrangement at 
metaphase I. Compare the 
arrangement of the R and r 
alleles relative to the Y and y 
alleles in anaphase I.
1
Each gamete gets 
a long and a short 
chromosome in 
one of four allele 
combinations.
2
Fertilization 
recombines the R 
and r alleles at 
random.
Fertilization results in 
the 9:3:3:1 
phenotypic ratio in 
the F2 generation.
3
y
F1 Generation
F2 Generation
3
Y
r
y
14 14 14 14
. Figure 15.4 The chromosomal basis of Mendel’s laws. Here we correlate the results of one 
of Mendel’s dihybrid crosses (see Figure 14.8) with the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis (see 
Figure 13.8). The arrangement of chromosomes at metaphase I of meiosis and their movement during 
anaphase I account for, respectively, the independent assortment and segregation of the alleles for 
seed color and shape. Each cell that undergoes meiosis in an F1 plant produces two kinds of gametes. 
If we count the results for all cells, however, each F1 plant produces equal numbers of all four kinds of 
gametes because the alternative chromosome arrangements at metaphase I are equally likely.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: The Chromosomal  
Basis of Independent Assortment 
MP3 Tutor: The Chromosomal  
Basis of Inheritance
? If you crossed an F1 plant above with a plant that was homozygous recessive for both genes (yyrr), 
how would the phenotypic ratio of the offspring compare with the 9:3:3:1 ratio seen here?

=== SIDE 349 ===

348 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
X
Y
. Figure 15.5 Human sex 
chromosomes (duplicated).
22 +
X
22 +
XX
76 +
ZZ
76 +
ZW
16
(Haploid)
32
(Diploid)
(a) The X-Y system. In mammals, the sex of an offspring depends 
on whether the sperm cell contains an X chromosome or a Y.
(b) The X-0 system. In grasshoppers, cockroaches, and some other 
insects, there is only one type of sex chromosome, the X. Females 
are XX; males have only one sex chromosome (X0). Sex of the 
offspring is determined by whether the sperm cell contains an X 
chromosome or no sex chromosome.
(c) The Z-W system. In birds, some fishes, and some insects, the 
sex chromosomes present in the egg (not the sperm) differ, and 
thus determine the sex of offspring. The sex chromosomes are 
designated Z and W. Females are ZW and males are ZZ.
(d) The haplo-diploid system. There are no sex chromosomes in 
most species of bees and ants. Females develop from fertilized eggs 
and are thus diploid. Males develop from unfertilized eggs and are 
haploid; they have no fathers.
44 +
XY
44 +
XXParents
Zygotes (offspring)
or
or
Sperm
+
Egg
    22 +
X
22 +
X
   22 +
Y
44 +
XX
44 +
XY
. Figure 15.6 Some chromosomal systems of sex 
determination. Numerals indicate the number of autosomes in 
the species pictured. In Drosophila, males are XY, but sex depends 
on the ratio of the number of X chromosomes to the number of 
autosome sets, not simply on the presence of a Y chromosome. 
In some species (not shown here), sex is determined not by 
chromosomes but by environmental factors such as temperature.
In humans, the anatomical signs of sex begin to emerge 
when the embryo is about 2 months old. Before then, the rudi-
ments of the gonads are generic—they can develop into either 
testes or ovaries, depending on whether or not a Y chromosome 
is present, and depending on what genes are active. A gene on 
the Y chromosome—called SRY, for sex-determining region of 
Y—is required for the development of testes. In the absence of 
SRY, the gonads develop into ovaries, even in an XY embryo.
Sex-linked genes exhibit unique 
patterns of inheritance
Morgan’s discovery of a trait (white eyes) that correlated with 
the sex of flies provided important support for the chromo-
some theory of inheritance. Because the identity of the sex 
chromosomes in an individual could be inferred by observing 
the sex of the fly, the behavior of the two members of the pair 
of sex chromosomes could be correlated with the behavior of 
the two alleles of the eye color gene. In this section, we’ll take 
a closer look at the role of sex chromosomes in inheritance.
The Chromosomal Basis of Sex
Although sex has traditionally been described as binary—
male or female—we are coming to understand that this 
classification may be too simplistic. Here, we use the term sex 
to refer to classification into a group with a shared set of ana-
tomical and physiological traits. In this sense, sex in many 
species is determined largely by inheritance of sex chromo-
somes. (The term gender, previously used as a synonym of 
sex, is now more often used to refer to an individual’s own 
experience of identifying as male, female, or otherwise.)
Humans and other mammals have two types of sex chro-
mosomes, designated X and Y. The Y chromosome is much 
smaller than the X chromosome (Figure 15.5). A person who 
inherits two X chromosomes, one from each parent, usually 
develops anatomy we associ-
ate with the “female” sex, 
while “male” properties are 
associated with the inheri-
tance of one X chromosome 
and one Y chromosome 
(Figure 15.6a). Short seg-
ments at either end of the 
Y chromosome are the only 
regions that are homologous 
with regions on the X. These 
homologous regions allow 
the X and Y chromosomes in males to pair and behave like 
homologs during meiosis in the testes.
In mammalian testes and ovaries, the two sex chromosomes 
segregate during meiosis. Each egg receives one X chromosome. 
In contrast, sperm fall into two categories: Half the sperm cells 
a male produces receive an X chromosome, and half receive a 
Y chromosome. We can trace the sex of each offspring to the 
events of conception: If a sperm cell bearing an X chromosome 
fertilizes an egg, the zygote is XX, a female; if a sperm cell con-
taining a Y chromosome fertilizes an egg, the zygote is XY, a 
male (see Figure 15.6a). Thus, in general, sex determination is a 
matter of chance—a fifty-fifty chance. Note that the mamma-
lian X-Y system isn’t the only chromosomal system for deter-
mining sex. Figure 15.6b–d illustrates three other systems.
CONCEPT 15.2
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   348 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 350 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 349
very few Y-linked genes, many of which help determine sex, 
the X chromosomes have numerous genes for characters unre-
lated to sex. X-linked genes in humans follow the same pattern 
of inheritance that Morgan observed for the eye color locus he 
studied in Drosophila (see Figure 15.3). Fathers pass X-linked 
alleles to all of their daughters but to none of their sons. In 
contrast, mothers can pass X-linked alleles to both sons and 
daughters, as shown in Figure 15.7 for the inheritance of a 
mild X-linked disorder, red-green color blindness.
If an X-linked trait is due to a recessive allele, a female 
will express the phenotype only if she is homozygous for 
that allele. Because males have only one locus, the terms 
homozygous and heterozygous lack meaning for describing their 
X-linked genes; the term hemizygous is used in such cases. 
Any male receiving the recessive allele from his mother will 
express the trait. For this reason, far more males than females 
have X-linked recessive disorders. However, even though the 
chance of a female inheriting a double dose of the mutant 
allele is much less than the probability of a male inheriting 
a single dose, there are females with X-linked disorders. For 
instance, color blindness is almost always inherited as an 
X-linked trait. A color-blind daughter may be born to a color-
blind father whose mate is a carrier (see Figure 15.7c). Because 
the X-linked allele for color blindness is relatively rare, though, 
the probability that such a man and woman will mate is low.
A number of human X-linked disorders are much more 
serious than color blindness, such as Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy, which affects about one out of 5,000 males born 
in the United States. The disease is characterized by a pro-
gressive weakening of the muscles and loss of coordination. 
Affected individuals’ life expectancy is into the mid-20s. 
Researchers have traced the disorder to the absence of a key 
muscle protein called dystrophin and have mapped the gene 
for this protein to a specific locus on the X chromosome. 
Since the gene is known, gene therapy is being explored.
A gene located on either sex chromosome is called a 
sex-linked gene. The human X chromosome contains 
approximately 1,100 genes, which are called X-linked 
genes, while genes located on the Y chromosome are called 
Y-linked genes. On the human Y chromosome, researchers 
have identified 78 genes that code for about 25 proteins (some 
genes are duplicates). About half of these genes are expressed 
only in the testis, and some are required for normal testicular 
functioning and the production of normal sperm. The Y chro-
mosome is passed along virtually intact from a father to all his 
sons. Because there are so few Y-linked genes, very few disor-
ders are transferred from father to son on the Y chromosome.
The development of female gonads in humans requires a 
gene called WNT4 (on chromosome 1, an autosome), which 
encodes a protein that promotes ovary development. An 
embryo that is XY but has extra copies of the WNT4 gene can 
develop rudimentary female gonads. Overall, sex is determined 
by the interactions of a network of gene products like these.
The biochemical, physiological, and anatomical features 
associated with “males” and “females” are turning out to be 
more complicated than previously thought, with many genes 
involved in their development. Because of the  complexity 
of this process, many variations exist: Some  individuals 
vary in the number of sex chromosomes in their cells 
(see Concept 15.4), and others are born with intermediate 
sexual (intersex) characteristics, or with anatomical features 
that do not match an individual’s sense of their own gender 
(transgender individuals). Sex determination is an active area 
of research that will likely yield a more sophisticated under-
standing in years to come.
Inheritance of X-Linked Genes
The fact that males and females inherit a different number of X 
chromosomes leads to a pattern of inheritance different from 
that produced by genes located on autosomes. While there are 
 
XNXN XNXn XNY XNXn XnY 
XNXnXN
XN
XN
Xn
XN
XnXNXn
XnY
XNY
XNY
XNXn
XNXn
XNY
XnY
XNXn
XnXn
XNY
XnY
3 3
Eggs Eggs Eggs
Xn Y Sperm XN Y Sperm Xn Y Sperm
(a) A father with color-blindness will transmit 
the mutant allele to all daughters but to no sons. 
When the mother is a dominant homozygote, 
the daughters will have the normal phenotype 
but will be carriers of the mutation.     
(b) If a carrier mates with a male who has 
normal color vision, there is a 50% chance that 
each daughter will be a carrier like her mother 
and a 50% chance that each son will have the 
disorder.   
(c) If a carrier mates with a color-blind male, 
there is a 50% chance that each child born to 
them will have the disorder, regardless of sex. 
Daughters who have normal color vision will 
be carriers, whereas males who have normal 
color vision will be free of the recessive allele.      
. Figure 15.7 The transmission of X-linked recessive traits. In this diagram, red-green 
color blindness is used as an example. The superscript N represents the dominant allele for 
normal color vision carried on the X chromosome, while n represents the recessive allele, 
which has a mutation causing color blindness. White boxes indicate unaffected individuals, 
light orange boxes indicate carriers, and dark orange boxes indicate color-blind individuals.
? If a color-blind woman married a man who 
had normal color vision, what would be the 
probable phenotypes of their children?
 Mastering Biology Animation:  
X-Linked Genes in “MendAliens”
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   349 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 351 ===

350 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(The regulatory role of DNA methylation is discussed in 
Concept 18.2.)  A particular region of each X chromosome con-
tains several genes involved in the inactivation process. The two 
regions, one on each X chromosome, associate briefly with each 
other in each cell at an early stage of embryonic development. 
Then one of the genes, called XIST (for X-inactive specific tran-
script), becomes active only on the chromosome that will become 
the Barr body (the inactive X). Multiple copies of the RNA 
product of this gene apparently attach to the X chromosome on 
which they are made, eventually almost covering it. Interaction 
of this RNA with the chromosome initiates X inactivation, and 
the RNA products of nearby genes help to regulate the process.
Hemophilia is an X-linked recessive disorder defined by 
the absence of one or more of the proteins required for blood 
clotting. When a person with hemophilia is injured, bleeding 
is prolonged because a firm clot is slow to form. Small cuts in 
the skin are usually not a problem, but bleeding in the muscles 
or joints can be painful and can lead to serious damage. In the 
1800s, hemophilia was widespread among the royal families 
of Europe. Queen Victoria of England is known to have passed 
the allele to several of her descendants. Subsequent intermar-
riage with royal family members of other nations, such as 
Spain and Russia, further spread this X-linked trait, and its 
incidence is well documented in royal pedigrees. A few years 
ago, new genomic techniques allowed sequencing of DNA 
from tiny amounts isolated from the buried remains of royal 
family members. The genetic basis of the mutation, and how it 
resulted in a nonfunctional blood-clotting factor, is now under-
stood. Today, people with hemophilia are treated as needed 
with intravenous injections of the protein that is missing.
X Inactivation in Female Mammals
Female mammals, including human females, inherit two 
X chromosomes—twice the number inherited by males—so 
you may wonder whether females make twice as many of the 
proteins encoded by X-linked genes as males. In fact, almost 
all of one X chromosome in each cell in female mammals 
becomes inactivated during early embryonic development. As 
a result, the cells of females and males have the same effective 
dose (one active copy) of most X-linked genes. The inactive X 
in each cell of a female condenses into a compact object called 
a Barr body (discovered by Canadian anatomist Murray Barr), 
which lies along the inside of the nuclear envelope. Most of the 
genes of the X chromosome that forms the Barr body are not 
expressed. In the ovaries, however, Barr body chromosomes 
are reactivated in the cells that give rise to eggs, resulting in 
every female gamete (egg) having an active X after meiosis.
British geneticist Mary Lyon demonstrated that the selec-
tion of which X chromosome will form the Barr body occurs 
randomly and independently in each embryonic cell present 
at the time of X inactivation. As a consequence, females consist 
of a mosaic of two types of cells: those with the active X derived 
from the father and those with the active X derived from the 
mother. After an X chromosome is inactivated in a particu-
lar cell, all mitotic descendants of that cell have the same 
inactive X. Thus, if a female is heterozygous for a sex-linked 
trait, about half of her cells will express one allele, while the 
others will express the alternate allele. Figure 15.8 shows how 
this mosaicism results in the patchy coloration of a tortoise-
shell cat. In humans, mosaicism can be observed in a recessive 
X-linked mutation that prevents the development of sweat 
glands. A woman who is heterozygous for this trait has patches 
of normal skin and patches of skin lacking sweat glands.
Inactivation of an X chromosome involves modification of 
the DNA and proteins bound to it called histones, including 
attachment of methyl groups (¬CH3) to DNA nucleotides. 
X chromosomes
Active X
Active XInactive X
A few cell divisions
and X chromosome
inactivation
Black fur Orange fur
Early embryo:
Two cell 
populations
in adult cat:
Allele for
orange fur
Allele for
black fur
. Figure 15.8 X inactivation and the tortoiseshell cat. The 
tortoiseshell gene is on the X chromosome, and the tortoiseshell 
phenotype requires the presence of two different alleles, one for 
orange fur and one for black fur. Normally, only females can have 
both alleles because only they have two X chromosomes. If a female 
cat is heterozygous for the tortoiseshell gene, she is tortoiseshell. 
Orange patches are formed by populations of cells in which the X 
chromosome with the orange allele is active; black patches have cells 
in which the X chromosome with the black allele is active. (“Calico” 
cats also have white areas, which are determined by another gene.)
  Mastering Biology 
HHMI Animation: 
X Inactivation 
CONCEPT CHECK 15.2
1. A white-eyed female Drosophila is mated with a red-eyed 
(wild-type) male, the reciprocal cross of the one shown in 
Figure 15.3. What phenotypes and genotypes do you pre-
dict for the offspring from this cross?
2. Mark is color-blind, and his wife Helena is not. Their son 
is also color-blind. What are the genotypes of Mark and 
Helena? What is the probability that a second child will be 
color-blind if the child is a girl? A boy?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Consider what you learned about 
dominant and recessive alleles in Concept 14.1. If a disorder were 
caused by a dominant X-linked allele, how would the inheritance 
pattern differ from what we see for recessive X-linked disorders?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   350 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 352 ===

Linked genes tend to be inherited 
together because they are located near 
each other on the same chromosome
The number of genes in a cell is far greater than the number 
of chromosomes; in fact, each chromosome (except the Y) 
has hundreds or thousands of genes. Genes located near each 
other on the same chromosome tend to be inherited together 
in genetic crosses; such genes are said to be genetically linked 
and are called linked genes. When geneticists follow linked 
genes in breeding experiments, the results deviate from those 
expected from Mendel’s law of independent assortment.
How Linkage Affects Inheritance
To see how linkage between genes affects the inheritance of 
two different characters, let’s examine another of Morgan’s 
Drosophila experiments. In this case, the characters are body 
color and wing size, each with two different phenotypes. 
Wild-type flies have gray bodies and normal-sized wings. 
In addition to these flies, Morgan had managed to obtain, 
through breeding, doubly mutant flies with black bodies 
and wings much smaller than normal, called vestigial wings. 
The mutant alleles are recessive to the wild-type alleles, and 
neither gene is on a sex chromosome. In his investigation 
of these two genes, Morgan carried out the crosses shown in 
Figure 15.9. The first was a P generation cross to generate F1 
dihybrid flies, and the second was essentially a testcross.
/uni25BC Figure 15.9 Inquiry
11 11:: :
11 00:: :
944965 185206 :: :
if genes are located on different chromosomes:
if genes are located on the same chromosome 
and parental alleles are always inherited together:
Predicted ratios
of testcross
offspring
Wild type
(gray normal)
Eggs
Sperm
Black
vestigial
Gray
vestigial
Black
normal
b1 b   vg1 vg
b1   vg1 b   vg1b1   vgb   vg
b vg
b b   vg vg b1 b   vg vgb b   vg1 vg
b1 b1 vg1 vg1
P Generation
(homozygous) Double mutant
(black body,
vestigial wings)
b b   vg vg
F1 dihybrid testcross
Testcross
offspring
Homozygous
recessive (black
body, vestigial
wings)
b b   vg vgb1 b   vg1 vg
3
3Wild type
(gray body,
normal wings)
Wild-type F1 dihybrid
(gray body, normal wings)
Morgan mated true-breeding P (parental) 
generation ﬂies—wild-type ﬂies with black, 
vestigial-winged ﬂies—to produce hetero-
zygous F1 dihybrids (b1 b    vg1 vg), all of 
which are wild-type in appearance.
He then mated wild-type F1 dihybrid 
females with homozygous recessive males. 
This testcross will reveal the genotype of 
the eggs made by the dihybrid female.
The male’s sperm contributes only 
recessive alleles, so the phenotype of the 
offspring reﬂects the genotype of the 
female’s eggs.
Note: Although only females (with 
pointed abdomens) are shown, half the 
offspring in each class would be males 
(with rounded abdomens).
Data from Morgan’s experiment:
How does linkage between two genes affect inheritance of characters?
Experiment Morgan wanted to know whether the genes for body color and wing size are genetically linked and, if so, how this 
affects their inheritance. The alleles for body color are b+ (gray) and b (black), and those for wing size are vg+ (normal) and vg (vestigial).
Results
Conclusion Since most offspring had a parental (P generation) 
phenotype, Morgan concluded that the genes for body color and wing 
size are genetically linked on the same chromosome. However, the 
production of a relatively small number of offspring with nonparental 
phenotypes indicated that some mechanism occasionally breaks the 
linkage between specific alleles of genes on the same chromosome.
Data from T. H. Morgan and C. J. Lynch, The linkage of two factors in  
Drosophila that are not sex-linked, Biological Bulletin 23:174–182 (1912).
WHAT IF? If the parental (P generation) flies had been true-breeding 
for gray body with vestigial wings and black body with normal wings, 
which phenotypic class(es) would be largest among the testcross 
offspring?
CONCEPT 15.3
 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 351
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   351 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 353 ===

352 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
which we know, but of the gametes made in that plant.) Let’s 
represent the cross by the following Punnett square:
YR Yr
YyRr
yr
yr
yyrr Yyrr
yR
yyRr
Gametes from yellow round
dihybrid parent (YyRr)
Parental-
type
offspring
Recombinant
offspring
Gametes from green
wrinkled homozygous
recessive parent (yyrr)
Notice in this Punnett square that one-half of the offspring 
are expected to inherit a phenotype that matches either of the 
phenotypes of the P (parental) generation originally crossed 
to produce the F1 dihybrid (see Figure 15.2). These matching 
offspring are called parental types (short for phenotypes). 
But two nonparental phenotypes are also found among the 
offspring. Because these offspring have new combinations of 
seed shape and color, they are called recombinant types, 
or recombinants for short. When 50% of all offspring are 
recombinants, as in this example, geneticists say that there is 
a 50% frequency of recombination. The predicted phenotypic 
ratios among the offspring are similar to what Mendel actu-
ally found in his YyRr * yyrr crosses.
A 50% frequency of recombination in such testcrosses 
is observed for any two genes that are located on different 
chromosomes and thus cannot be linked. The physical basis 
of recombination between unlinked genes is the random 
orientation of homologous chromosomes at metaphase I of 
meiosis, which leads to the independent assortment of the 
two unlinked genes (see Figure 13.11 and the question in the 
Figure 15.4 legend).
Recombination of Linked Genes: Crossing Over
Now, let’s explain the results of the Drosophila testcross in 
Figure 15.9. Recall that most (83%) of the offspring from the 
testcross for body color and wing size had parental pheno-
types. That suggested that the two genes were on the same 
chromosome, since the occurrence of parental types with 
a frequency greater than 50% indicates that the genes are 
linked. About 17% of offspring, however, were recombinants.
Seeing these results, Morgan proposed that some process 
must occasionally break the physical connection between 
specific alleles of genes on the same chromosome. Later 
experiments showed that this process, now called crossing 
over, accounts for the recombination of linked genes. In 
crossing over, which occurs while replicated homologous 
chromosomes are paired during prophase of meiosis I, a 
set of proteins breaks the DNA molecules of one maternal 
and one paternal chromatid and rejoins each to the other 
The resulting flies had a much higher proportion of 
the combinations of traits seen in the P generation flies 
(called parental phenotypes) than would be expected if 
the two genes assorted independently. Morgan thus con-
cluded that body color and wing size are usually inherited 
together in specific (parental) combinations because the 
genes are linked; they are near each other on the same 
chromosome:
b1 vg1
b   vg
3
Most offspring
vgb
vgb
vgb
b1 vg1
or
vgb
vgb
F1 dihybrid female 
and homozygous 
recessive male 
in testcross
As you proceed, be sure to keep in mind the distinction 
between the terms linked genes (two or more genes on the 
same chromosome that tend to be inherited together) and 
sex-linked gene (a single gene on a sex chromosome).
As Figure 15.9 shows, both of the combinations of traits 
not seen in the P generation (called nonparental phenotypes) 
were also produced in Morgan’s experiments, suggesting that 
the body color and wing size alleles are not always linked 
genetically. To understand this conclusion, we need to fur-
ther explore genetic recombination, the production of 
offspring with combinations of traits that differ from those 
found in either P generation parent.
Genetic Recombination and Linkage
Meiosis and random fertilization generate genetic variation 
among offspring of sexually reproducing organisms due to 
independent assortment of chromosomes, crossing over in 
meiosis I, and the possibility of any sperm fertilizing any egg 
(see Concept 13.4). Here we’ll examine the chromosomal 
basis of recombination of alleles in relation to the genetic 
findings of Mendel and Morgan.
Recombination of Unlinked Genes: Independent 
Assortment of Chromosomes
Mendel learned from crosses in which he followed two char-
acters that some offspring have combinations of traits that 
do not match those of either parent. For example, consider a 
cross of a dihybrid pea plant with yellow round seeds, hetero-
zygous for both seed color and seed shape (YyRr), with a plant 
homozygous for both recessive alleles (with green wrinkled 
seeds, yyrr). (This cross acts as a testcross because the results 
will reveal the genotype not only of the dihybrid YyRr plant, 

=== SIDE 354 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 353
P generation
(homozygous)
F1 dihybrid testcross
Meiosis I and II
Replication 
of chromosomes
Replication 
of chromosomes
Meiosis I
(including 
crossing over)
Meiosis II Recombinant
chromosomes
Homozygous recessive
(black body,
vestigial wings)
Wild-type F1 dihybrid
(gray body,
normal wings)
Double mutant
(black body,
vestigial wings)
Wild type
(gray body,
normal wings)
Testcross
offspring
b1 vg1
b   vg
b1  vg1
b1 vg1
b    vg 
b    vg 
b1vg1
b1 vg1
b1 vg1
b  vg1
b  vg
b1 vg
b vg
b vg
b vg
b vg
b vg
b vg
965
Wild type
(gray normal)
Eggs
b  vg
b   vg
vg1 b   vg1 
b  vg1 
b1  vg
b1 vgb1 vg1
944
Black
vestigial
b   vg
b   vg
206
Gray
vestigial
b   vg
185
Black
normal
b   vg
Parental-type offspring Recombinant offspring
2,300 total offspring
Recombination
frequency =391 recombinants3 100 = 17%
b1
Sperm
vgb
vgb
vgb
c Figure 15.10 Chromosomal 
basis for recombination of linked 
genes. In these diagrams re-creating 
the testcross in Figure 15.9, we track 
chromosomes as well as genes. 
The maternal chromosomes (those 
present in the wild-type F1 dihybrid) 
are color-coded red and pink to 
distinguish one homolog from the 
other before any meiotic crossing 
over has occurred. Because crossing 
over between the b+/b and vg+/vg 
loci occurs in some, but not most, 
egg-producing cells, more eggs 
with parental-type chromosomes 
than with recombinant ones are 
produced in the mating females. 
Fertilization of the eggs by sperm 
of genotype b vg gives rise to 
some recombinant offspring. The 
recombination frequency is the 
percentage of recombinant flies in 
the total pool of offspring.
DRAW IT Suppose, as in the question 
at the bottom of Figure 15.9, the 
parental (P generation) flies were 
true-breeding for gray body with 
vestigial wings and black body with 
normal wings. Draw the chromosomes 
in each of the four possible kinds of 
eggs from an F1 female, and label 
each chromosome as “parental” or 
“recombinant.”
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
Linked Genes and Crossing 
Over
(see Figure 13.9). In effect, when a single crossover occurs, 
end portions of two nonsister chromatids trade places.
Figure 15.10 shows how crossing over in a dihybrid female 
fly resulted in recombinant eggs and ultimately recombinant 
offspring in Morgan’s testcross. Most eggs had a chromosome 
with either the b+ vg+ or b vg parental genotype, but some eggs 
had a recombinant chromosome (b+ vg or b vg+). Fertilization 
of all classes of eggs by homozygous recessive sperm (b vg) 
produced an offspring population in which 17% exhibited a 
nonparental, recombinant phenotype, reflecting combina-
tions of alleles not seen before in either P generation parent. 
In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can use a statistical test 
to analyze the results from an F1 dihybrid testcross and see 
whether the two genes assort independently or are linked.

=== SIDE 355 ===

354 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Using the Chi-Square (x2) Test
Are Two Genes Linked or Unlinked? Genes that are in close 
proximity on the same chromosome will result in the linked al-
leles being inherited together more often than not. But how can 
you tell if certain alleles are inherited together due to linkage or 
whether they just happen to assort together randomly? In this 
exercise, you’ll use a simple statistical test, the chi-square (x2) 
test, to analyze phenotypes of F1 testcross progeny in order to 
see whether two genes are linked or unlinked.
How These Experiments Are Done If genes are unlinked and 
assorting independently, the phenotypic ratio of offspring from 
an F1 testcross is expected to be 1:1:1:1 (see Figure 15.9). If the 
two genes are linked, however, the observed phenotypic ratio of 
the offspring will not match that ratio. Given that random fluctua-
tions in the data do occur, how much must the observed numbers 
deviate from the expected numbers for us to conclude that the 
genes are not assorting independently but may instead be linked?
To answer this question, scientists use a statistical test. This test, 
called a chi-square (x2) test, compares an observed data set with an 
expected data set predicted by a hypothesis (here, that the genes 
are unlinked) and measures the discrepancy between the two, thus 
determining the “goodness of fit.” If the discrepancy between the 
observed and expected data sets is so large that it is unlikely to have 
occurred by random fluctuation, we say there is statistically signifi-
cant evidence against the hypothesis (or, more specifically, evidence 
for the genes being linked). If the discrepancy is small, then our 
observations are well explained by random variation alone. In this 
case, we say that the observed data are consistent with our hy-
pothesis, or that the discrepancy is statistically insignificant. Note, 
however, that consistency with our hypothesis is not the same as 
proof of our hypothesis. Also, the size of the experimental data set 
is important: With small data sets like this one, even if the genes are 
linked, discrepancies might be small by chance alone if the linkage 
is weak. For simplicity, we overlook the effect of sample size here.
Data from the Simulated Experiment In cosmos plants, pur-
ple stem (A) is dominant to green stem (a), and short petals (B) 
is dominant to long petals (b). In a simulated cross, AABB plants 
were crossed with aabb plants to generate F1 dihybrids (AaBb), 
which were then testcrossed (AaBb * aabb). A total of 900 off-
spring plants were scored for stem color and flower petal length.
Offspring 
from 
testcross of 
AaBb (F1) 3 
aabb
Purple 
stem/short 
petals 
(A-B-)*
Green 
stem/short 
petals 
(aaB-)
Purple 
stem/long 
petals 
(A-bb)
Green 
stem/long 
petals 
(aabb)
Expected 
ratio if the 
genes are 
unlinked
1 1 1 1
Expected 
number of 
offspring  
(of 900)
Observed 
number of 
offspring  
(of 900)
220 210 231 239
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. The results in the data table are from a simulated F1 dihybrid 
testcross. The hypothesis that the two genes are unlinked pre-
dicts that the offspring phenotypic ratio will be 1:1:1:1. Using 
this ratio, calculate the expected number of each phenotype 
out of the 900 total offspring, and enter the values in that 
data table.
2. The goodness of fit is measured by x2. This statistic measures the 
amounts by which the observed values differ from their respec-
tive predictions to indicate how closely the two sets of values 
match. The formula for calculating this value is
x2 
5 S 
 (o 2 e)2
e
where g = sum of, o = observed and e = expected. Calculate the 
x2 value for the data using the table below. Fill out that table, 
carrying out the operations indicated in the top row. Then add 
up the entries in the last column to find the x2 value.
Testcross 
Offspring
Expected 
(e)
Observed 
(o)
Deviation 
(o 2 e)(o 2 e)2(o 2 e)2/e
A2B2 220
aaB2 210
A2bb 231
aabb 239
x2=Sum
3. The x2 value means nothing on its own—it is used to find the 
probability that, assuming the hypothesis is true, the observed 
data set could have resulted from random fluctuations. A low 
probability suggests that the observed data are not consis-
tent with the hypothesis and thus the hypothesis should be 
rejected. A standard cutoff point used by biologists is a prob-
ability of 0.05 (5%). If the probability corresponding to the 
x2 value is 0.05 or less, the differences between observed and 
expected values are considered statistically significant and the 
hypothesis (that the genes are unlinked) should be rejected. 
If the probability is above 0.05, the results are not statistically 
significant; the observed data are consistent with the hypoth-
esis that the genes are unlinked.
To find the probability, locate your x2 value in the x2 
distribution table in Appendix D. The “degrees of freedom” 
(df) of your data set is the number of categories (here, 
4 phenotypes) minus 1, so df = 3. (a) Determine which values 
on the df = 3 line of the table your calculated x2 value lies 
between. (b) The column headings for these values show 
the probability range for your x2 number. Based on whether 
there are nonsignificant (p . 0.05) or significant (p…0.05) 
differences between the observed and expected values, are 
the data consistent with the hypothesis that the two genes 
are unlinked and assorting independently, or is there enough 
evidence to reject this hypothesis?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
 Cosmos plants
*If the phenotype is dominant, a dash is used for the second allele; it 
could be either the dominant or recessive allele.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   354 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 356 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 355
A genetic map based on recombination frequencies is 
called a linkage map. Figure 15.11 shows Sturtevant’s link-
age map of three genes: the body color (b) and wing size (vg) 
genes depicted in Figure 15.10 and a third gene, called cin-
nabar (cn). Cinnabar is one of many Drosophila genes affecting 
eye color. Cinnabar eyes, a mutant phenotype, are a brighter 
red than the wild-type color. The recombination frequency 
between cn and b is 9%; that between cn and vg, 9.5%; and that 
between b and vg, 17%. In other words, crossovers between 
cn and b and between cn and vg are about half as frequent as 
crossovers between b and vg. Only a map that locates cn about 
midway between b and vg is consistent with these data, as you 
can prove to yourself by drawing alternative maps. Sturtevant 
expressed the distances between genes in map units, defining 
one map unit as equivalent to a 1% recombination frequency.
In practice, the interpretation of recombination data is 
more complicated than this example suggests. Some genes 
New Combinations of Alleles: Variation  
for Natural Selection
EVOLUTION The physical behavior of chromosomes during 
meiosis contributes to the generation of variation in offspring 
(see Concept 13.4). Each pair of homologous chromosomes 
lines up independently of other pairs during metaphase I, and 
crossing over prior to that, during prophase I, can mix and 
match parts of maternal and paternal homologs. Mendel’s 
elegant experiments show that the behavior of the abstract 
entities known as genes—or, more concretely, alleles of 
genes—also leads to variation in offspring (see Concept 14.1). 
Now, putting these different ideas together, you can see that 
the recombinant chromosomes resulting from crossing over 
may bring alleles together in new combinations, and the 
subsequent events of meiosis distribute to gametes the recom-
binant chromosomes in a multitude of combinations, such as 
the new variants seen in Figures 15.9 and 15.10. Random fer-
tilization then increases even further the number of variant 
allele combinations that can be created.
This abundance of genetic variation provides the raw 
material on which natural selection works. If the traits con-
ferred by particular combinations of alleles are better suited 
for a given environment, organisms possessing those geno-
types will be expected to thrive and leave more offspring, 
ensuring the continuation of their genetic complement. In 
the next generation, of course, the alleles will be shuffled 
anew. Ultimately, the interplay between environment and 
phenotype (and thus genotype) will determine which genetic 
combinations persist over time.
Mapping the Distance Between Genes Using 
Recombination Data: Scientific Inquiry
The discovery of linked genes and recombination due to 
crossing over motivated one of Morgan’s students, Alfred H. 
Sturtevant, to work out a method for constructing a genetic 
map, an ordered list of the genetic loci along a particular 
chromosome.
Sturtevant hypothesized that the percentage of recom-
binant offspring, the recombination frequency, calculated 
from experiments like the one in Figures 15.9 and 15.10, 
depends on the distance between genes on a chromosome. 
He assumed that crossing over is a random event, with the 
chance of crossing over approximately equal at all points 
along a chromosome. Based on these assumptions, Sturtevant 
predicted that the farther apart two genes are, the higher the 
probability that a crossover will occur between them and therefore 
the higher the recombination frequency. His reasoning was 
simple: The greater the distance between two genes, the more 
points there are between them where crossing over can occur. 
Using recombination data from various fruit fly crosses, 
Sturtevant proceeded to assign relative positions to genes on 
the same chromosomes—that is, to map genes.
Application A linkage map shows the relative locations of 
genes along a chromosome.
Technique A linkage map is based on the assumption that 
the probability of a crossover between two genetic loci is 
proportional to the distance separating the loci. The recom-
bination frequencies used to construct a linkage map for 
a particular chromosome are obtained from experimental 
crosses, such as the cross depicted in Figures 15.9 and 15.10. 
The distances between genes are expressed as map units, 
with one map unit equivalent to a 1% recombination fre-
quency. Genes are arranged on the chromosome in the order 
that best fits the data.
Results In this example, the observed recombination 
frequencies between three Drosophila gene pairs (b and cn, 
9%; cn and vg, 9.5%; and b and vg, 17%) best fit a linear order 
in which cn is positioned about halfway between the other 
two genes:
17%
9% 9.5%
Recombination
frequencies
Chromosome
b cn vg
The b-vg recombination frequency (17%) is slightly less than 
the sum of the b-cn and cn-vg frequencies (9 + 9.5 = 18.5%) 
because of the few times that one crossover occurs between 
b and cn and another crossover occurs between cn and vg. The 
second crossover would “cancel out” the first, reducing the 
observed b-vg recombination frequency while contributing to 
the frequency between each of the closer pairs of genes. The 
value of 18.5% (18.5 map units) is closer to the actual distance 
between the genes. In practice, a geneticist would add the 
smaller distances in constructing a map.
Constructing a Linkage Map
/uni25BC Figure 15.11 Research Method
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   355 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 357 ===

356 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
distances (in nanometers, for instance). A linkage map does 
portray the order of genes along a chromosome, but it does 
not accurately portray the precise locations of those genes. 
Other methods enable geneticists to construct cytogenetic maps 
of chromosomes, which locate genes with respect to chromo-
somal features, such as stained bands, that can be seen in the 
microscope. Technical advances over recent decades have enor-
mously increased the rate and affordability of DNA sequencing. 
Therefore, today, most researchers sequence whole genomes to 
map the locations of genes of a given species. The entire nucle-
otide sequence is the ultimate physical map of a chromosome, 
revealing the physical distances in DNA nucleotides between 
gene loci (see Concept 20.1). Comparing a linkage map with 
such a physical map or with a cytogenetic map of the same 
chromosome, we find that the linear order of genes is identical 
in all the maps, but the spacing between genes is not.
on a chromosome are so far from each other that a crossover 
between them is virtually certain. The observed frequency of 
recombination in crosses involving two such genes can have a 
maximum value of 50%, a result indistinguishable from that 
for genes on different chromosomes. In this case, the physical 
connection between genes on the same chromosome is not 
reflected in the results of genetic crosses. Despite being on the 
same chromosome and thus being physically connected, the 
genes are genetically unlinked; alleles of such genes assort inde-
pendently, as if they were on different chromosomes. In fact, 
at least two of the genes for pea characters that Mendel stud-
ied are now known to be on the same chromosome, but the 
distance between them is so great that linkage is not observed 
in genetic crosses. Consequently, the two genes behaved as 
if they were on different chromosomes in Mendel’s experi-
ments. Genes located far apart on a chromosome are mapped 
by adding the recombination frequencies from crosses involv-
ing closer pairs of genes lying between the two distant genes.
Using recombination data, Sturtevant and his colleagues 
were able to map numerous Drosophila genes in linear arrays. 
They found that the genes clustered into four groups of 
linked genes (linkage groups). Light microscopy had revealed 
four pairs of chromosomes in Drosophila, so the linkage map 
provided additional evidence that genes are located on chro-
mosomes. Each chromosome has a linear array of specific 
genes, each gene with its own locus (Figure 15.12).
Because a linkage map is based strictly on recombination 
frequencies, it gives only an approximate picture of a chromo-
some. The frequency of crossing over is not actually uniform 
over the length of a chromosome, as Sturtevant assumed, 
and therefore map units do not correspond to actual physical 
0 57.5 104.5
Short 
aristae
Maroon
eyes
Down-
curved
wings
Black 
body
XY
Cinnabar
eyes
Mutant phenotypes
Wild-type phenotypes
Vestigial
wings
Brown 
eyes
Long 
aristae
(appendages
on head)  
Gray 
body
Red
eyes
Red
eyes
Red
eyes
Normal
wings
Normal
wings
16.5 48.5 67.0 75.5
IIIII
IV
I
. Figure 15.12 A partial genetic (linkage) map of a 
Drosophila chromosome. This partial map shows just seven 
mapped genes on Drosophila chromosome II. (DNA 
sequencing has revealed over 9,000 genes on 
that chromosome.) The number at each 
gene locus is the number of map units from 
the arista length gene (far left).
CONCEPT CHECK 15.3
1. When two genes are located on the same chromosome, 
what is the physical basis for the production of recombinant 
offspring in a testcross between a dihybrid parent and a 
double-mutant (recessive) parent?
2. VISUAL SKILLS For each type of offspring of the testcross 
in Figure 15.9, explain the relationship between its pheno-
type and the alleles contributed by the female parent. (It 
will be useful to draw out the chromosomes of each fly and 
follow the alleles throughout the cross.)
3. WHAT IF? If genes A and B are on the same chromosome, 
but are 63 map units apart, will they behave as linked or 
unlinked? Explain your answer.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Alterations of chromosome 
number or structure cause some 
genetic disorders
As you have learned so far in this chapter, the phenotype of 
an organism can be affected by small-scale changes involving 
individual genes. Random mutations are the source of all new 
alleles, which can lead to new phenotypic traits.
Large-scale chromosomal changes can also affect an organ-
ism’s phenotype. Physical and chemical disturbances, as well 
as errors during meiosis, can damage chromosomes in major 
ways or alter their number in a cell. Large-scale chromosomal 
alterations in humans and other mammals often lead to 
spontaneous abortion (miscarriage) of a fetus, and individuals 
born with these types of genetic defects commonly exhibit 
various developmental disorders. Plants appear to tolerate 
such genetic defects better than animals do.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Terry Orr-Weaver:  
Why are humans so bad at meiosis?
CONCEPT 15.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   356 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 358 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 357
Nondisjunction can also occur during mitosis. If such an error 
takes place early in embryonic development, then the aneu-
ploid condition is passed along by mitosis to a large number of 
cells and is likely to have a substantial effect on the organism.
Some organisms have more than two complete chromo-
some sets in all somatic cells. The general term for this chro-
mosomal alteration is polyploidy; the specific terms triploidy 
(3n) and tetraploidy (4n) indicate three and four chromosomal 
sets, respectively. One way a triploid cell may arise is by the 
fertilization of an abnormal diploid egg produced by non-
disjunction of all its chromosomes. Tetraploidy could result 
from the failure of a 2n zygote to divide after replicating its 
chromosomes. Subsequent normal mitotic divisions would 
then produce a 4n embryo.
Polyploidy is fairly common in the plant kingdom. The 
spontaneous origin of polyploid individuals plays an impor-
tant role in plant evolution (see Concept 24.2). Many species 
we eat are polyploid: Bananas are triploid, wheat hexaploid 
(6n), and strawberries octoploid (8n). Polyploid animal spe-
cies are much less common, but there are a few fishes and 
amphibians known to be polyploid. In general, polyploids 
are more nearly normal in appearance than aneuploids. One 
extra (or missing) chromosome apparently disrupts genetic 
balance more than does an entire extra set of chromosomes.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Polyploid Plants
Alterations of Chromosome Structure
Errors in meiosis or damaging agents such as radiation can 
cause breakage of a chromosome, which can lead to four 
types of changes in chromosome structure (Figure 15.14). A 
deletion occurs when a chromosomal fragment is lost. The 
affected chromosome is then missing certain genes. A broken 
fragment may become reattached as an extra segment to a 
sister or nonsister chromatid, producing a duplication of a 
portion of that chromosome. A chromosomal fragment may 
also reattach to the original chromosome but in the reverse 
orientation, producing an inversion. A fourth possible 
result of chromosomal breakage is for the fragment to join 
a nonhomologous chromosome, a rearrangement called a 
translocation.
Deletions and duplications are especially likely to occur 
during meiosis. In crossing over, nonsister chromatids some-
times exchange unequal-sized segments of DNA, so that one 
partner gives up more genes than it receives (see Figure 20.13). 
The products of such an unequal crossover are one chromo-
some with a deletion and one chromosome with a duplication.
A diploid embryo that is homozygous for a large deletion 
(both homologs have the deletion) or, if a male, has a single X 
chromosome with a large deletion is usually missing a num-
ber of essential genes. This condition is typically lethal.
 Duplications and translocations also tend to be harm-
ful. In reciprocal translocations, in which segments are 
exchanged between nonhomologous chromosomes, and in 
Abnormal Chromosome Number
Ideally, the meiotic spindle distributes chromosomes to 
daughter cells without error. But there is an occasional mis-
hap, called a nondisjunction, in which the members of a 
pair of homologous chromosomes do not move apart prop-
erly during meiosis I or sister chromatids fail to separate dur-
ing meiosis II (Figure 15.13). In nondisjunction, one gamete 
receives two of the same type of chromosome and another 
gamete receives no copy. The other chromosomes are usually 
distributed normally.
If either of the aberrant gametes unites with a normal 
one at fertilization, the zygote will also have an abnormal 
number of a particular chromosome, a condition known 
as aneuploidy. Fertilization involving a gamete that has 
no copy of a particular chromosome will lead to a missing 
chromosome in the zygote (so that the cell has 2n - 1 chro-
mosomes); the aneuploid zygote is said to be monosomic 
for that chromosome. If a chromosome is present in triplicate 
in the zygote (so that the cell has 2n + 1 chromosomes), the 
aneuploid cell is trisomic for that chromosome. Mitosis will 
subsequently transmit the anomaly to all embryonic cells. 
Monosomy and trisomy are estimated to occur in 10–25% of 
human conceptions and are the main reason for pregnancy 
loss. If the organism survives, it usually has a set of traits 
caused by the abnormal dose of the genes associated with 
the extra or missing chromosome. Down syndrome is an 
example of trisomy in humans that will be discussed later. 
n + 1 n + 1n – 1 nnn + 1n – 1n – 1
Nondisjunction
Non-
disjunction
Meiosis I
Gametes
Number of chromosomes
 Meiosis II
Nondisjunction of homo-
logous chromosomes in 
meiosis I
(a) Nondisjunction of sister
chromatids in meiosis II
(b)
. Figure 15.13 Meiotic nondisjunction. Gametes with an 
abnormal chromosome number can arise by nondisjunction in 
either meiosis I or meiosis II. For simplicity, the figure does not show 
the spores formed by meiosis in plants. Ultimately, spores form 
gametes that have the defects shown. (See Figure 13.6.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   357 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 359 ===

358 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
ABC DEF G H
ABC BC DE
ABC FGHE
ADCB E
MN O CD E AB PQ
A deletion removes a chromosomal segment.
ABC DE FGH
ABCD EF G H
AB CDE FGH MNO PQ R
FGH
FGH
FGH R
A translocation moves a segment from 
one chromosome to a nonhomologous 
chromosome. In a reciprocal translocation, 
the most common type, nonhomologous 
chromosomes exchange fragments.
(a) Deletion
A duplication repeats a segment.
An inversion reverses a segment
within a chromosome.
(b) Duplication
(c) Inversion
(d) Translocation
Less often, a nonreciprocal translocation occurs: A chromosome 
transfers a fragment but receives none in return (not shown).
. Figure 15.14 Alterations of chromosome structure. Red 
arrows indicate breakage points. Dark purple highlights the 
chromosomal parts affected by the rearrangements.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Alterations of Chromosome 
Structure
inversions, the balance of genes is not abnormal—all genes 
are present in their normal doses. Nevertheless, transloca-
tions and inversions can alter phenotype because a gene’s 
expression can be influenced by its location among neighbor-
ing genes, which can have devastating effects.
Human Conditions Due to Chromosomal 
Alterations
Alterations of chromosome number and structure are associated 
with a number of human conditions, which vary in severity. 
As described earlier, nondisjunction in meiosis results in 
aneuploidy in gametes and any resulting zygotes. Although the 
frequency of aneuploid zygotes may be quite high in humans, 
most of these chromosomal alterations are so disastrous to 
development that the affected embryos are spontaneously 
aborted long before birth. However, some types of aneuploidy 
appear to upset the genetic balance less than others, so indi-
viduals with certain aneuploid conditions can survive to birth 
and beyond. These individuals have a set of traits—a syndrome—
characteristic of the type of aneuploidy. Genetic disorders 
caused by aneuploidy can be diagnosed before birth by fetal 
testing (see Figure 14.19).
Down Syndrome (Trisomy 21)
One aneuploid condition, Down syndrome, affects approxi-
mately one out of every 830 children born in the United States 
(Figure 15.15). Down syndrome is usually the result of an 
extra chromosome 21, so that each body cell has a total of 47 
chromosomes. Because the cells are trisomic for chromosome 
21, Down syndrome is often called trisomy 21. Down syn-
drome includes characteristic facial features, short stature, cor-
rectable heart defects, and developmental delays. Individuals 
with Down syndrome have an increased chance of developing 
leukemia and Alzheimer’s disease but have a lower rate of high 
blood pressure, atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries), 
stroke, and many types of solid tumors. People with Down 
syndrome, on average, have a life span shorter than is typical; 
however, most live to middle age and beyond with proper 
medical care. Many live independently or at home with their 
families, are employed, and are valuable contributors to their 
communities. Almost all males and about half of females with 
Down syndrome are sexually underdeveloped and sterile.
The frequency of Down syndrome increases with the age 
of the mother. While the syndrome occurs in just 0.1% (1 out 
of 900) births of children born to women at age 30, the risk 
. Figure 15.15 Down syndrome. The karyotype shows trisomy 
21, the most common cause of Down syndrome. The child exhibits 
the facial features characteristic of this syndrome.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   358 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 360 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 359
intellectual disabilities, and a cry that sounds like the mewing 
of a distressed cat. Such individuals usually die in infancy or 
early childhood.
Chromosomal translocations can also occur during mito-
sis; some have been implicated in certain cancers, including 
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). This disease occurs when 
a reciprocal translocation happens during mitosis of cells that 
are precursors of white blood cells. The exchange of a large 
portion of chromosome 22 with a small fragment from a tip 
of chromosome 9 produces a much shortened, easily recog-
nized chromosome 22, called the Philadelphia chromosome 
(Figure 15.16). Such an exchange causes cancer by creating a 
new “fused” gene that leads to uncontrolled cell cycle progres-
sion. (The mechanism of gene activation will be discussed in 
Concept 18.5.)
climbs to 1% (1 out of 100) for mothers at age 40 and is even 
higher for older mothers. The correlation of Down syndrome 
with maternal age has not yet been explained. Most cases result 
from nondisjunction during meiosis I, and some research 
points to an age-dependent abnormality in meiosis. Trisomies 
of some other chromosomes (13 and 18) also increase in inci-
dence with maternal age, although infants with other autoso-
mal trisomies rarely survive for long. Medical experts recom-
mend that prenatal screening for trisomies in the embryo be 
offered to all pregnant women, due to its low risk and useful 
results. In 2008, a law was passed stipulating that medical prac-
titioners give accurate, up-to-date information about any pre-
natal or postnatal diagnosis received by parents and that they 
connect parents with appropriate support services.
Aneuploidy of Sex Chromosomes
Aneuploid conditions involving sex chromosomes appear 
to upset the genetic balance less than those involving auto-
somes. This may be because the Y chromosome carries rela-
tively few genes. Also, extra copies of the X chromosome 
simply become inactivated as Barr bodies.
An extra X chromosome in a male, producing XXY, occurs 
approximately once in every 650 live male births. People 
with this condition, called Klinefelter syndrome, have male 
sex organs, but their testes are small and produce little or no 
sperm. Signs and symptoms vary widely, but may include taller 
than average height, less muscle mass, and enlarged breast 
tissue. Affected individuals may have learning disabilities. 
Testosterone replacement therapy helps stimulate changes 
that typically occur at puberty in males. About one of every 
1,000 males is born with an extra Y chromosome (XYY). These 
males undergo typical sexual development and do not exhibit 
any well-defined syndrome, but tend to be taller than average.
Females with trisomy X (XXX), which occurs once in 
approximately 1,000 live female births, are generally healthy 
and have no unusual physical features other than being 
slightly taller than average. Females with trisomy X are at risk 
for learning disabilities. Monosomy X, which is called Turner 
syndrome, occurs about once in every 2,500 female births and 
is the only known viable monosomy in humans. Although 
these X0 individuals are phenotypically female, they are 
usually sterile because their sex organs do not mature. When 
provided with estrogen replacement therapy, girls with 
Turner syndrome do develop secondary sex characteristics. 
Most have typical intelligence.
Disorders Caused by Structurally Altered 
Chromosomes
Many deletions in human chromosomes, even in a hetero-
zygous state, cause severe problems. One such syndrome, 
known as cri du chat (“cry of the cat”), results from a specific 
deletion in chromosome 5. A child born with this dele-
tion has a small head with unusual facial features, severe 
Normal chromosome 9
Normal chromosome 22
Translocated chromosome 9
Reciprocal translocation
Translocated chromosome 22
(Philadelphia chromosome)
. Figure 15.16 Translocation associated with chronic 
myelogenous leukemia (CML). The cancerous cells in nearly 
all CML patients contain an abnormally short chromosome 22, 
the so-called Philadelphia chromosome, and an abnormally long 
chromosome 9. These altered chromosomes result from the 
reciprocal translocation shown here, which presumably occurred 
in a single white blood cell precursor undergoing mitosis and was 
then passed along to all descendant cells.
CONCEPT CHECK 15.4
1. About 5% of individuals with Down syndrome have a chro-
mosomal translocation in which a third copy of chromo-
some 21 is attached to chromosome 14. If this translocation 
occurred in a parent’s gonad, how could it lead to Down 
syndrome in a child?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS The ABO blood type locus has been 
mapped on chromosome 9. A father who has type AB blood 
and a mother who has type O blood have a child with tri-
somy 9 and type A blood. Using this information, can you 
tell in which parent the nondisjunction occurred? Explain 
your answer. (See Figures 14.11 and 15.13.)
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS The gene that is activated on the 
Philadelphia chromosome codes for an intracellular tyro-
sine kinase. Review the discussion of cell cycle control in 
Concept 12.3, and explain how the activation of this gene 
could contribute to the development of cancer.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   359 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 361 ===

360 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Some inheritance patterns 
are exceptions to standard 
Mendelian inheritance
In the previous section, you learned about deviations from 
the usual patterns of chromosomal inheritance due to 
abnormal events in meiosis and mitosis. We conclude this 
chapter by describing two normally occurring exceptions 
to Mendelian genetics, one involving genes located in the 
nucleus and the other involving genes located outside the 
nucleus. In both cases, the sex of the parent contributing an 
allele is a factor in the pattern of inheritance.
Genomic Imprinting
Throughout our discussions of Mendelian genetics and the 
chromosomal basis of inheritance, we have assumed that a 
given allele will have the same effect whether it was inher-
ited from the mother or the father. This is probably a safe 
assumption most of the time. For example, when Mendel 
crossed purple-flowered pea plants with white-flowered pea 
plants, he observed the same results regardless of whether 
the purple-flowered parent supplied the eggs or the sperm. In 
recent years, however, geneticists have identified a number of 
traits in placental mammals (and some flowering plants) that 
depend on which parent passed along the alleles for those 
traits. Such variation in phenotype depending on whether 
an allele is inherited from the male or female parent is called 
genomic imprinting. (Note that unlike sex-linked genes, 
most imprinted genes are on autosomes.) Using newer DNA 
sequence-based methods, about 100 imprinted genes have 
been identified in humans and 120–180 in mice.
Genomic imprinting occurs during gamete formation and 
results in the silencing of a particular allele of certain genes. 
Because these genes are imprinted differently in sperm and eggs, 
the offspring expresses only one allele of an imprinted gene, the 
one that has been inherited from a specific parent—either the 
female parent or the male parent, depending on the particular 
gene. The imprints are then transmitted to all body cells during 
early development. In each generation, the old imprints are 
“erased” in gamete-producing cells, and the chromosomes of 
the developing gametes are newly imprinted according to the 
sex of the individual forming the gametes. In a given species, 
the imprinted genes are always imprinted in the same way. 
For instance, a gene imprinted for maternal allele expression is 
always imprinted this way, generation after generation.
Consider, for example, the mouse gene for insulin-like growth 
factor 2 (Igf2), one of the first imprinted genes to be identified. 
Although this growth factor is required for normal prenatal 
growth, only the paternal allele is expressed (Figure 15.17a). 
Evidence that the Igf2 gene is imprinted came initially from 
crosses between normal-sized (wild-type) mice and dwarf 
Paternal
chromosome
Normal Igf2 allele
is expressed.
Normal Igf2 allele
is not expressed.
Normal-sized mouse
(wild type)
Maternal
chromosome
Normal Igf2 allele 
is expressed.
Mutant Igf2 allele 
is expressed.
Mutant Igf2 allele 
is not expressed.
Normal-sized mouse (wild type) Dwarf mouse (mutant)
Mutant Igf2 allele 
inherited from mother
Mutant Igf2 allele 
inherited from father
Normal Igf2 allele
is not expressed.
(a) Homozygote. A mouse homozygous for the wild-type Igf2 allele 
is normal-sized. Only the paternal allele of this gene is expressed.
(b) Heterozygotes. Heterozygotes have different phenotypes 
depending on which allele is contributed by each parent. Matings 
between wild-type mice and those homozygous for the recessive 
mutant Igf2 allele produce heterozygous offspring. Since the 
maternal Igf2 allele is not expressed, the dwarf (mutant) 
phenotype is seen only when the father contributes the 
mutant allele.
. Figure 15.17 Genomic imprinting of the mouse I g f 2 gene.
(mutant) mice homozygous for a recessive mutation in the Igf2 
gene. The phenotypes of heterozygous offspring (with one nor-
mal allele and one mutant) differed depending on whether the 
mutant allele came from the mother or the father (Figure 15.17b).
What exactly is a genomic imprint? It turns out that 
imprinting can involve either silencing an allele in one type 
of gamete (egg or sperm) or activating it in the other. In many 
cases, the imprint seems to consist of methyl (¬CH3) groups 
that are added to cytosine nucleotides of one of the alleles. 
Such methylation may silence the allele, an effect consistent 
with evidence that heavily methylated genes are usually inac-
tive (see Concept 18.2). However, for a few genes, methyla-
tion has been shown to activate expression of the allele. This 
is the case for the Igf2 gene: Methylation of certain cytosines 
on the paternal chromosome leads to expression of the pater-
nal Igf2 allele, by an indirect mechanism involving chroma-
tin structure and protein-DNA interactions.
Genomic imprinting may affect only a small fraction of 
the genes in mammalian genomes, but most of the known 
imprinted genes are critical for embryonic development. Recent 
research has revealed that imprinted genes are involved in 
regulation of body temperature, sleep, and other metabolic 
functions. Some evolutionary biologists have proposed that 
CONCEPT 15.5
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   360 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 362 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 361
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Shirley Tilghman:  
Discovering imprinted genes
Similar maternal inheritance is also the rule for mitochon-
drial genes in most animals and plants, because the mitochon-
dria passed on to a zygote come from the cytoplasm of the egg. 
(The few mitochondria contributed by the sperm appear to 
be destroyed in the egg.) The products of most mitochondrial 
genes help make up some of the protein complexes of the 
electron transport chain and ATP synthase (see Figure 10.14). 
Defects in one or more of these proteins, therefore, reduce 
the amount of ATP the cell can make and have been shown 
to cause a number of human disorders in as many as one out 
of every 5,000 births. Because the parts of the body most sus-
ceptible to energy deprivation are the nervous system and the 
muscles, most mitochondrial diseases primarily affect these 
systems. For example, mitochondrial myopathy causes weakness, 
intolerance of exercise, and muscle deterioration. Another 
mitochondrial disorder is Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy, 
which can produce sudden blindness in people as young as 
their 20s or 30s. The four mutations found thus far to cause 
this disorder affect oxidative phosphorylation during cellular 
respiration, a crucial function for the cell (see Concept 10.4).
The fact that mitochondrial disorders are inherited only 
from the mother suggests a way to avoid passing along these 
disorders. The chromosomes from the egg of an affected mother 
could be transferred to an egg of a healthy donor that has had 
its own chromosomes removed. This “two-mother” egg could 
then be fertilized by a sperm from the prospective father and 
transplanted into the womb of the prospective mother, becom-
ing an embryo with three parents. After optimizing conditions 
for this approach in monkeys, researchers reported in 2013 that 
they have successfully carried out this procedure on human 
eggs. In 2016, clinics in Mexico and China reported the births 
of such “three-parent” babies. In the United Kingdom, this 
procedure was approved for use in 2017. In the United States, 
approval by the relevant federal agencies has not yet occurred.
In addition to the rarer diseases clearly caused by defects 
in mitochondrial DNA, mitochondrial mutations inherited 
from a person’s mother may contribute to at least some types 
of diabetes and heart disease, as well as to other disorders that 
commonly debilitate the elderly, such as Alzheimer’s disease. 
In the course of a lifetime, new mutations gradually accumu-
late in our mitochondrial DNA, and some researchers think 
that these mutations play a role in the normal aging process.
genomic imprinting represents a kind of evolved “competition” 
between males (who benefit from larger offspring more likely to 
pass on the father’s genes) and female mammals (who benefit 
from smaller offspring during birth). In experiments with mice, 
embryos engineered to inherit both copies of certain chromo-
somes from the same parent usually die before birth, whether 
that parent is male or female. Normal development seems to 
require that embryonic cells have exactly one active copy—not 
zero, not two—of certain genes. The association of improper 
imprinting with abnormal development and certain cancers has 
stimulated ongoing studies of how different genes are imprinted.
Inheritance of Organelle Genes
Although our focus in this chapter has been on the chromo-
somal basis of inheritance, we end with an important amend-
ment: Not all of a eukaryotic cell’s genes are located on nuclear 
chromosomes, or even in the nucleus; some genes are located 
in organelles in the cytoplasm. Because they are outside the 
nucleus, these genes are sometimes called extranuclear genes 
or cytoplasmic genes. Mitochondria, as well as chloroplasts and 
other plastids in plants, contain small circular DNA molecules 
that carry a number of genes. These organelles reproduce them-
selves and transmit their genes to daughter organelles. Genes on 
organelle DNA are not distributed to offspring according to the 
same rules that direct the distribution of nuclear chromosomes 
during meiosis, so they do not display Mendelian inheritance.
The first hint that extranuclear genes exist came from studies by 
the German scientist Carl Correns on the inheritance of yellow or 
white patches on the leaves of an otherwise green plant. In 1909, 
he observed that the coloration of the offspring was determined 
only by the maternal parent (the source of eggs) and not by the 
paternal parent (the source of sperm). Subsequent research showed 
that such coloration patterns, or variegation (Figure 15.18), are 
due to mutations in genes controlling pigmentation that are 
located in the DNA circles in the organelles called plastids (see 
Concept 7.5). In most plants, a zygote receives all its plastids from 
the cytoplasm of the egg and none from the sperm, which contrib-
utes little more than a haploid set of chromosomes. An egg may 
contain plastids with different alleles for a pigmentation gene. As 
the zygote develops, plastids containing wild-type or mutant pig-
mentation genes are distributed randomly to daughter cells. The 
pattern of leaf coloration exhibited by a plant depends on the ratio 
of wild-type to mutant plastids in its various tissues.
b Figure 15.18 A painted nettle 
coleus plant. The variegated (patterned) 
leaves on this coleus plant (Plectranthus 
scutellarioides) result from mutations 
that affect expression of pigment genes 
located in plastids, which generally are 
inherited from the maternal parent.
CONCEPT CHECK 15.5
1. Gene dosage—the number of copies of a gene that are 
actively being expressed—is important to proper develop-
ment. Identify and describe two processes that establish the 
proper dosage of certain genes.
2. Reciprocal crosses between two primrose varieties, A and B, pro-
duced the following results: A female * B male S offspring with 
all green (nonvariegated) leaves; B female * A male S offspring 
with patterned (variegated) leaves. Explain these results.
3. WHAT IF? Mitochondrial genes are critical to the energy 
metabolism of cells, but mitochondrial disorders caused by 
mutations in these genes are generally not lethal. Why not?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   361 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 363 ===

362 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
• An F1 dihybrid testcross yields parental types with the same 
combination of traits as those in the P generation parents and 
recombinant types (recombinants) with new combinations 
of traits not seen in either P generation parent. Because of the in-
dependent assortment of chromosomes, unlinked genes exhibit a 
50% frequency of recombination in the gametes. For genetically 
linked genes, crossing over between nonsister chromatids 
during meiosis I accounts for the observed recombinants, always 
less than 50%.
• The order of genes on a chromosome and the relative distances 
between them can be deduced from recombination frequencies 
observed in genetic crosses. These data allow construction of a 
linkage map (a type of genetic map). The farther apart genes 
are, the more likely their allele combinations will be recombined 
during crossing over.
? Why are specific alleles of two distant genes more likely to show 
recombination than those of two closer genes?
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
15 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 15.1
Morgan showed that Mendelian inheritance  
has its physical basis in the behavior of  
chromosomes (pp. 345–347)
• Morgan’s work with an eye color gene in Drosophila led to the 
chromosome theory of inheritance, which states that genes 
are located on chromosomes and that the behavior of chromo-
somes during meiosis accounts for Mendel’s laws.
? What characteristic of the sex chromosomes allowed Morgan to 
correlate their behavior with that of the alleles of the eye color gene?
CONCEPT 15.2
Sex-linked genes exhibit unique patterns of 
inheritance (pp. 348–350)
• Sex is often chromosomally based. Humans and other mammals 
have an X-Y system in which sex is largely determined by whether 
a Y chromosome is present. Other systems are found in birds, 
fishes, and insects.
• The sex chromosomes carry sex-linked genes, virtually all of 
which are on the X chromosome (X-linked). Any male who in-
herits a recessive X-linked allele (from his mother) will express the 
trait, such as color blindness.
• In mammalian females, one of the two X chromosomes in each 
cell is randomly inactivated during early embryonic develop-
ment, becoming highly condensed into a Barr body.
? Why are males affected by X-linked disorders much more often than 
females?
CONCEPT 15.3
Linked genes tend to be inherited together because 
they are located near each other on the same 
chromosome (pp. 351–356)
d
d
Egg
e
e
c
b
a
f
cba
f
D
D
Sperm
P generation
gametes
+E
E
C
B
A
F
CBA
F
This F1 cell has 2n = 6 chromo-
somes and is heterozygous for all 
six genes shown (AaBbCcDdEeFf).
Red = maternal; blue = paternal. 
Each chromosome has 
hundreds or thousands 
of genes. Four (A, B, C, 
F) are shown on this one.
The alleles of unlinked 
genes are either on
separate chromosomes 
(such as d and e)
or so far apart on the 
same chromosome
(c and f)  that they
assort independently. 
Genes on the same chromo-
some whose alleles are so 
close together that they do 
not assort independently 
(such as a, b, and c) are said 
to be genetically linked.
CONCEPT 15.4
Alterations of chromosome number or structure cause 
some genetic disorders (pp. 356–359)
• Aneuploidy, an abnormal chromosome number, can result 
from nondisjunction during meiosis. When a normal gamete 
unites with one containing two copies or no copies of a particular 
chromosome, the resulting zygote and its descendant cells either 
have one extra copy of that chromosome (trisomy, 2n + 1) or 
are missing a copy (monosomy, 2n - 1). Polyploidy (extra 
sets of chromosomes) can result from nondisjunction of all 
chromosomes.
• Chromosome breakage can result in alterations of chromo-
some structure: deletions, duplications, inversions, and 
translocations. Translocations can be reciprocal or nonreciprocal.
• Changes in the number of chromosomes per cell or in the struc-
ture of individual chromosomes can affect the phenotype and, 
in some cases, lead to disorders. Such alterations cause Down 
syndrome (usually due to trisomy of chromosome 21), certain 
cancers associated with chromosomal translocations that occur 
during mitosis, and various other human disorders.
? Why are inversions and reciprocal translocations less likely to be 
lethal than are aneuploidy, duplications, deletions, and nonreciprocal 
translocations?
CONCEPT 15.5
Some inheritance patterns are exceptions to standard 
Mendelian inheritance (pp. 360–361)
• In mammals, the phenotypic effects of a small number of particu-
lar genes depend on which allele is inherited from each parent, a 
phenomenon called genomic imprinting. Imprints are formed 
during gamete production, with the result that one allele (either 
maternal or paternal) is not expressed in offspring.
• The inheritance of traits controlled by the genes present in mito-
chondria and plastids depends solely on the maternal parent be-
cause the zygote’s cytoplasm containing these organelles comes 
from the egg. Some diseases affecting the nervous and muscular 
systems are caused by defects in mitochondrial genes that prevent 
cells from making enough ATP .
? Explain how genomic imprinting and inheritance of mitochondrial 
and chloroplast DNA are exceptions to standard Mendelian inheritance.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   362 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 364 ===

 CHAPTER 15  Linkage and Chromosomes 363
are obtained. How many F2 plants of each of the four 
phenotypes do you expect?
9. A Drosophila with long wings and red eyes is mated with one 
that has short wings and white eyes. Out of the 200 offspring 
obtained, 49 have long wings and red eyes, 52 have long wings 
and white eyes, 48 have short wings and red eyes, and 51 have 
short wings and white eyes. Are the genes encoding wing size 
and eye color linked? Explain.
10. Banana plants, which are triploid, are seedless and  
therefore sterile. Thinking about meiosis, propose a possible 
explanation.
11. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Crossing over is thought to be 
evolutionarily advantageous because it continually shuffles 
genetic alleles into novel combinations. It was thought that 
Y-linked genes might degenerate because they lack homologous 
genes on the X chromosome with which to pair up prior 
to crossing over. However, when the Y chromosome was 
sequenced, scientists discovered eight large regions that were 
internally homologous to each other, and several genes are 
duplicates. (Y chromosome researcher David Page has called it a 
“hall of mirrors.”) How might this be beneficial?
12. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY DRAW IT Assume you are mapping 
genes A, B, C, and D in Drosophila. Y ou know that these genes 
are linked on the same chromosome, and you determine the 
recombination frequencies between each pair of genes to be 
as follows: A and B, 8%; A and C, 28%; A and D, 25%; B and C, 
20%; B and D, 33%.
(a)  Describe how you determined the recombination frequency 
for each pair of genes.
(b) Draw a chromosome map based on your data.
13. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION The continuity of 
life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA. In a 
short essay (100–150 words), relate the structure and behavior 
of chromosomes to inheritance in both asexually and sexually 
reproducing species.
14. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Butterflies have an X-Y sex 
determination system that is 
different from that of flies or 
humans. Female butterflies may be 
either XY or X0, while butterflies 
with two or more X chromosomes 
are males. This photograph shows 
a tiger swallowtail gynandromorph, 
which is half male (left side) and 
half female (right side). Given that the first division of the 
zygote divides the embryo into the future right and left halves 
of the butterfly, propose a hypothesis that explains how 
nondisjunction during the first mitosis might have produced 
this unusual-looking butterfly.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
1. A man with hemophilia (a recessive, sex-linked condition) has 
a daughter without hemophilia who marries a man without 
hemophilia. What is the probability of their daughter having 
hemophilia? Their son? If they have four sons, that all will be 
affected?
2. Polydactyly is a condition in which an individual is born with 
extra fingers or toes. It is an autosomal dominant trait when 
it occurs in the absence of any other congenital abnormality. 
Peter’s parents and children have polydactyly, but he has the 
normal number of digits. What may have happened in Peter’s 
case?
3. A wild-type fruit fly (heterozygous for gray body color and 
normal wings) is mated with a black fly with vestigial wings. 
The offspring have the following phenotypic distribution: wild-
type, 778; black vestigial, 785; black normal, 158; gray vestigial, 
162. What is the recombination frequency between these genes 
for body color and wing size? Is this consistent with the results 
of the experiment in Figure 15.9? Draw the chromosomes in 
the wild-type and black parents.
4. A planet is inhabited by creatures that reproduce with the 
same hereditary patterns seen in humans. Three phenotypic 
characters are height (T = tall, t = dwarf), head appendages 
(A = antennae, a = no antennae), and nose shape (S = upturned 
snout, s = downturned snout). Since the creatures are not 
“intelligent,” Earth scientists are able to do some controlled 
breeding experiments using various heterozygotes in 
testcrosses. For tall heterozygotes with antennae, the offspring 
are tall/antennae, 46; dwarf/antennae, 7; dwarf/no antennae, 
42; tall/no antennae, 5. For heterozygotes with antennae and 
an upturned snout, the offspring are antennae/upturned snout, 
47; antennae/downturned snout, 2; no antennae/downturned 
snout, 48; no antennae/upturned snout, 3. Calculate the 
recombination frequencies for both experiments.
5. Scientists do a testcross of the creatures from problem 4 using 
heterozygotes for height and nose shape. The offspring are tall/
upturned snout, 41; dwarf/upturned snout, 8; dwarf/downturned 
snout, 43; tall/downturned snout, 8. Calculate the recombination 
frequency from these data, and then use your answer from 
problem 4 to determine the correct order of the three linked genes.
6. A wild-type fruit fly (heterozygous for gray body color and 
red eyes) is mated with a black fruit fly with purple eyes. The 
offspring are wild-type, 721; black/purple, 751; gray/purple, 49; 
black/red, 45. What is the recombination frequency between 
these genes for body color and eye color? Using information 
from problem 3, what fruit flies (genotypes and phenotypes) 
would you mate to determine the order of the body color, wing 
size, and eye color genes on the chromosome?
7. Suppose you discover a new monogenic phenotypic trait in a 
family and want to know how it is genetically inherited. An 
analysis of the genetic tree reveals that only males have this trait 
and not a single woman of the family has it. Y ou also find out that 
all the males have this trait. Where do you think the gene causing 
this trait is located? Explain.
8. Two genes of a flower, one controlling blue (B) versus white 
(b) petals and the other controlling round (R) versus oval (r) 
stamens, are linked and are 10 map units apart. You cross 
a homozygous blue/oval plant with a homozygous white/
round plant. The resulting F1 progeny are crossed with 
homozygous white/oval plants, and 1,000 offspring plants 
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How does smoking affect the Y chromosome?
Go to “Does Smoking Make a Man Less of a Man?”
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C15_PRF.indd   363 14/03/20   2:02 AM

=== SIDE 365 ===

Figure 16.1 The elegant double-helical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
shook the scientific world when it was proposed in April 1953 by James Watson and 
Francis Crick. The DNA you inherited from your parents contains all your genes—
your genetic information.
Nucleic Acids and Inheritance16
How does DNA replication transmit genetic information?
Unduplicated 
chromosome 
(one DNA 
molecule and 
proteins)
Replication 
begins at 
multiple sites 
(origins), each 
forming a 
replication 
bubble with a 
fork at each end.
Each gene is a unit of 
hereditary information 
consisting of a specific
DNA sequence.
Two DNA molecules, which are 
distributed to daughter cells.
Duplicated 
and condensed 
chromosome 
(two DNA 
molecules and 
proteins)
DNA replication allows genetic information to be inherited from a parent cell to
daughter cells (by mitosis) and from generation to generation (starting with meiosis).
DNA replication begins.
DNA replication and chromosome
condensation is completed.
DNA
segment
from a
chromosome
New
strands
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 16
• Figure 16.15 Walkthrough: Addition of a 
Nucleotide to a DNA Strand
• BioFlix® Animation: DNA Replication
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: The Hershey-Chase Experiment
• Tutorial: Visualizing DNA
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• DNA Replication (Concept 16.2)
Study Tip
Draw DNA replication: Make up a 
single-stranded DNA sequence that 
is 40 nucleotides in length. As you 
go through Concepts 16.1 and 16.2, 
use your sequence to draw a double-
stranded DNA molecule, labeling the 
ends. Then diagram the process of 
replication of your DNA molecule.
16.1 DNA is the genetic material p. 365
16.2 Many proteins work together in 
DNA replication and repair p. 370
16.3 A chromosome consists of a DNA 
molecule packed together with 
proteins p. 380
KEY CONCEPTS
DNA Structure and Replication
TCA TT TA AAGGGTG C G AA …TG
364
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   364 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 366 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 365
100 nm
Phage
head
Tail
sheath
DNA
Tail fiber
Genetic
material
Bacterial
cell
c Figure 16.3 A virus 
infecting a bacterial cell.  
A phage called T2 attaches to a 
host cell and injects its genetic 
material through the plasma 
membrane, while the head and 
tail parts remain on the outer 
bacterial surface (colorized TEM).
CONCEPT 16.1
DNA is the genetic material
Today, even schoolchildren have heard of DNA, and scien-
tists routinely manipulate DNA in the laboratory. Early in the 
20th century, however, identifying the molecules of inheri-
tance posed a major challenge to biologists.
The Search for the Genetic Material: 
Scientific Inquiry
Once T. H. Morgan’s group showed that genes exist as parts of 
chromosomes (described in Concept 15.1), the two chemical 
components of chromosomes—DNA and protein—emerged 
as the leading candidates for the genetic material. Until the 
1940s, the case for proteins seemed stronger: Biochemists had 
identified proteins as a class of macromolecules with great het-
erogeneity and specificity of function, essential requirements 
for the hereditary material. Moreover, little was known about 
nucleic acids, whose physical and chemical properties seemed 
far too uniform to account for the multitude of specific inher-
ited traits exhibited by every organism. This view gradually 
changed as the role of DNA in heredity was worked out in 
studies of bacteria and the viruses that infect them, systems 
far simpler than fruit flies or humans. Let’s trace the search for 
the genetic material as a case study in scientific inquiry.
Evidence That DNA Can Transform Bacteria
In 1928, a British medical officer named Frederick Griffith 
was trying to develop a vaccine against pneumonia. He was 
studying Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacterium that causes 
pneumonia in mammals. Griffith had two strains (varieties) 
of the bacterium, one pathogenic (disease-causing) and one 
nonpathogenic (harmless). He was surprised to find that 
when he killed the pathogenic bacteria with heat and then 
mixed the cell remains with living bacteria of the nonpatho-
genic strain, some of the living cells became pathogenic 
(Figure 16.2). Furthermore, this newly acquired trait of 
pathogenicity was inherited by all the descendants of the 
transformed bacteria. Apparently, some chemical component 
of the dead pathogenic cells caused this heritable change, 
although the identity of the substance was not known. 
Griffith called the phenomenon transformation, now 
defined as a change in genotype and phenotype due to the 
assimilation of external DNA by a cell. Later work by Oswald 
Avery, Maclyn McCarty, and Colin MacLeod identified the 
transforming substance as DNA.
Scientists remained skeptical, however, since many still 
viewed proteins as better candidates for the genetic material. 
Also, many biologists were not convinced that bacterial genes 
would be similar in composition and function to those of 
more complex organisms. But the major reason for the con-
tinued doubt was that so little was known about DNA.
Experiment Frederick Griffith studied two strains of the 
bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae. The S (smooth) strain 
can cause pneumonia in mice; it is pathogenic because 
the cells have an outer capsule that protects them from an 
animal’s immune system. Cells of the R (rough) strain lack 
a capsule and are nonpathogenic. To test for the trait of 
pathogenicity, Griffith injected mice with the two strains:
Living S cells
(pathogenic
control)
Living R cells
(nonpathogenic
control)
Heat-killed S cells
(nonpathogenic
control)
Mixture of heat-
killed S cells and
living R cells
Results
In blood sample, living S cells 
were found. They could 
reproduce, yielding more S cells.
Mouse dies Mouse diesMouse healthy Mouse healthy
Conclusion The living R bacteria had been transformed into 
pathogenic S bacteria by an unknown, heritable substance 
from the dead S cells that enabled the R cells to make capsules.
Data from F. Griffith, The significance of pneumococcal types, Journal of 
Hygiene 27:113–159 (1928).
WHAT IF? How did this experiment rule out the possibility that the R 
cells simply used the dead S cells’ capsules to become pathogenic?
Can a genetic trait be transferred between 
different bacterial strains?
/uni25BC Figure 16.2 Inquiry
Evidence That Viral DNA Can Program Cells
Additional evidence that DNA was the genetic material came 
from studies of viruses that infect bacteria (Figure 16.3). 
These viruses are called bacteriophages (meaning 
“bacteria-eaters”), or phages for short. Viruses are much sim-
pler than cells. A virus is little more than DNA (or sometimes 
RNA) enclosed by a protective coat, which is often simply 
protein. To produce more 
viruses, a virus must infect a 
cell and take over the cell’s 
metabolic machinery.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   365 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 367 ===

366 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Phages have been widely used as tools by researchers in 
molecular genetics. In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase 
performed experiments showing that DNA is the genetic mate-
rial of a phage known as T2. This is one of many phages that 
infect Escherichia coli (E. coli), a bacterium that normally lives in 
the intestines of mammals and is a model organism for molecu-
lar biologists. At that time, biologists already knew that T2, like 
many other phages, was composed almost entirely of DNA and 
protein. They also knew that the T2 phage could quickly turn an 
E. coli cell into a T2-producing factory that released many copies 
of new phages when the cell ruptured. Somehow, T2 could 
reprogram its host cell to produce viruses. But which viral 
component—protein or DNA—was responsible?
/uni25BC Figure 16.4 Inquiry
Is protein or DNA the genetic material of phage T2?
Experiment Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase used radioactive sulfur and phosphorus to trace the 
fates of protein and DNA, respectively, of T2 phages that infected bacterial cells. They wanted to see 
which of these molecules entered the cells and could reprogram them to make more phages.
Mixed radioactively
labeled phages with
bacteria. The phages
infected the bacterial cells.
Agitated the mixture in 
a blender to free the 
phage parts outside the 
bacteria from the cells.
Centrifuged the mixture
so that bacteria formed a 
pellet at the bottom of 
the test tube; free phages 
and phage parts, which 
are lighter, remained 
suspended in the liquid.
Measured the 
radioactivity in 
the pellet and 
the liquid.
Batch 1: Phages were
grown with radioactive 
sulfur (35S), which was 
incorporated into phage 
protein (pink).
Batch 2: Phages were
grown with radioactive 
phosphorus (32P), which 
was incorporated into 
phage DNA (blue). Centrifuge
Centrifuge
Pellet (bacterial
cells and contents)
Phage
Bacterial cell
Radioactive
protein
DNA
Radioactivity 
(phage protein)
found in liquid
Empty
protein shell
Phage
DNA
Pellet
Radioactive
DNA
Radioactivity 
(phage DNA)
found in pellet
1 2 3 4
Results W h e n  p r o t e i n s  w e r e  l a b e l e d  ( b a t c h  1 ) ,  r a d i o a c t i v-
ity remained outside the cells, but when DNA was labeled 
(batch 2), radioactivity was found inside the cells. Cells con-
taining radioactive phage DNA released new phages with 
some radioactive phosphorus.
Conclusion Phage DNA entered bacterial cells, but phage 
proteins did not. Hershey and Chase concluded that DNA, not 
protein, functions as the genetic material of phage T2.
Data from A. D. Hershey and M. Chase, Independent functions of viral protein 
and nucleic acid in growth of bacteriophage, Journal of General Physiology 
36:39–56 (1952).
WHAT IF? How would the results have differed if proteins carried the 
genetic information?
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  T h e  H e r s h e y - C h a s e  E x p e r i m e n t
Hershey and Chase answered this question by devising an 
experiment showing that only one of the two components of 
T2 actually enters the E. coli cell during infection (Figure 16.4). 
In their experiment, they used a radioactive isotope of sulfur to 
tag protein in one batch of T2 and a radioactive isotope of phos-
phorus to tag DNA in a second batch. Because protein, but not 
DNA, contains sulfur, radioactive sulfur atoms were incorporated 
only into the protein of the phage. In a similar way, the atoms of 
radioactive phosphorus labeled only the DNA, not the protein, 
because nearly all the phage’s phosphorus is in its DNA. In the 
experiment, separate samples of nonradioactive E. coli cells were 
infected separately with the protein-labeled and DNA-labeled 
batches of T2. The researchers then tested the two samples 
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   366 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 368 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 367
shortly after the onset of infection to see which type of radioac-
tively labeled molecule—protein or DNA—had entered the bacte-
rial cells and would therefore be capable of reprogramming them.
Hershey and Chase found that the phage DNA entered the 
host cells, but the phage protein did not. Moreover, when these 
bacteria were returned to a culture medium and the infection 
ran its course, the E. coli released phages that contained some 
radioactive phosphorus. This result further showed that the 
DNA inside the cell played an ongoing role during the infec-
tion process. They concluded that the DNA injected by the 
phage must be the molecule carrying the genetic information 
that makes the cells produce new viral DNA and proteins. The 
Hershey-Chase experiment was a landmark study because it 
provided powerful evidence that nucleic acids, rather than pro-
teins, are the hereditary material, at least for certain viruses.
Additional Evidence That DNA Is the Genetic Material
Further evidence that DNA is the genetic material came 
from the laboratory of biochemist Erwin Chargaff. DNA was 
known to be a polymer of nucleotides, each having three 
components: a nitrogenous (nitrogen-containing) base, a 
pentose sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group 
(Figure 16.5). The base can be adenine (A), thymine (T), 
guanine (G), or cytosine (C). Chargaff analyzed the base 
composition of DNA from a number of different organisms. 
In 1950, he reported that the base composition of DNA 
varies from one species to another. For example, he found 
that 32.8% of sea urchin DNA nucleotides have the base A, 
whereas only 24.7% of those from the bacterium E. coli have 
an A. This evidence of molecular diversity among species, 
which most scientists had presumed to be absent from DNA, 
made DNA a more credible candidate for the genetic material.
Chargaff also noticed a peculiar regularity in the ratios 
of nucleotide bases. In the DNA of each species he studied, 
the number of adenines approximately equaled the number 
of thymines, and the number of guanines approximately 
equaled the number of cytosines. In sea urchin DNA, for 
example, the four bases are present in these percentages: 
A=32.8% and T=32.1%; G=17.7% and C=17.3%.  
(The percentages are not exactly the same because of 
limitations in Chargaff’s techniques.)
These two findings became known as Chargaff’s rules: 
(1) DNA base composition varies between species, and (2) for 
each species, the percentages of A and T bases are roughly 
equal, as are those of G and C bases. In the Scientific Skills 
Exercise, you can use Chargaff’s rules to predict percentages 
of nucleotide bases. The basis for these rules remained unex-
plained until the discovery of the double helix.
 Mastering Biology H H M I  A n i m a t i o n :  C h a r g a f f ’ s  R a t i o
Building a Structural Model of DNA
Once most biologists were convinced that DNA was the genetic 
material, the challenge was to determine how the structure 
O–O
–OP
–O
O
O
P
–O
O
O
O
O
O
P
–O
O
O
O
P
Nitrogenous bases
Guanine (G)
Cytosine (C)
Adenine (A)
Thymine (T)
N
NN
N
N
N
O
O
N
H
H
H H
H
NH
H
H
H
H
O
O
CH3
H
NH
H
N
N
N
N
H
Nitrogenous base
DNA 
nucleotide
Sugar-phosphate backbone
HH
HH
CH2
CH2
CH2
5¿ end
3¿ end
5¿
1¿
2¿3¿
4¿
Sugar 
(deoxyribose)
Phosphate
group
HH
H
H
HH
OO
HH
H
HH
CH2 OO
OO
OO
HH
H OH
HH
NN
5¿
1¿
3¿ 2¿
4¿
. Figure 16.5 The structure of a DNA strand. Each DNA nucleotide 
monomer consists of the sugar deoxyribose (blue) attached to both a 
nitrogenous base (A, T, G, or C), and a phosphate group (yellow). The 
phosphate group of one nucleotide is attached to the sugar of the next 
by a covalent bond, forming a “backbone” of alternating phosphates 
and sugars from which the bases project. A polynucleotide strand has 
directionality, from the 5/uni2032 end (with the phosphate group) to the 3/uni2032 
end (with the ¬OH group of the sugar). 5/uni2032and 3/uni2032 refer to the numbers 
assigned to the carbons in the sugar ring (see magenta numbers).
of DNA could account for its role in inheritance. By the early 
1950s, the arrangement of covalent bonds in a nucleic acid 
polymer was well established (see Figure 16.5), and research-
ers focused on discovering the three-dimensional structure of 
DNA. Among the scientists working on the problem were Linus 
Pauling, at the California Institute of Technology, and Maurice 
Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, at King’s College in London. 
First to come up with the complete answer, however, were 
two scientists who were relatively unknown at the time—the 
American James Watson and the Englishman Francis Crick.
The collaborative work that solved the puzzle of DNA 
structure began soon after Watson went to Cambridge 
University, where Crick was studying protein structure with 
a technique called X-ray crystallography (see Figure 5.21). 
 Mastering Biology Animation: DNA and RNA Structure
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   367 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 369 ===

368 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(a) Rosalind Franklin (b) Franklin’s X-ray diffraction 
photograph of DNA
. Figure 16.6 Rosalind Franklin and her X-ray diffraction 
photo of DNA.
Given the Percentage Composition of One Nucleotide in a 
Genome, Can We Predict the Percentages of the Other Three 
Nucleotides? Even before the structure of DNA was elucidated, 
Erwin Chargaff and his co-workers noticed a pattern in the base 
composition of nucleotides from different species: The percent-
age of adenine (A) bases roughly equaled that of thymine (T) 
bases, and the percentage of cytosine (C) bases roughly equaled 
that of guanine (G) bases. Further, the percentage of each pair 
(A–T or C–G) varied from species to species. We now know that 
the 1:1 A/T and C/G ratios are due to complementary base pairing 
between A and T and between C and G in the DNA double helix, 
and differences between species are due to the unique sequences 
of bases along a DNA strand. In this exercise, you will apply 
Chargaff’s rules to predict the composition of bases in a genome.
How the Experiments Were Done In Chargaff’s experiments, 
DNA was extracted from the given species, hydrolyzed to break 
apart the nucleotides, and then analyzed chemically. These stud-
ies provided approximate values for each type of nucleotide. 
(Today, whole-genome sequencing allows base composition anal-
ysis to be done more precisely directly from the sequence data.)
Data from the Experiments Tables are useful for organizing 
sets of data representing a common set of values (here, percent-
ages of A, G, C, and T) for a number of different samples (in this 
case, from different species). You can apply the patterns that you 
see in the known data to predict unknown values. In the table, 
complete base distribution data are given for sea urchin DNA 
and salmon DNA; you will use Chargaff’s rules to fill in the rest of 
the table with predicted values.
Working with Data in a Table
Base Percentage
Source of DNA Adenine Guanine Cytosine Thymine
Sea urchin 32.8 17.7 17.3 32.1
Salmon 29.7 20.8 20.4 29.1
Wheat 28.1 21.8 22.7
E. coli 24.7 26.0
Human 30.4 30.1
Ox 29.0
Average %
Data from several papers by Chargaff: for example, E. Chargaff  
et al., Composition of the desoxypentose nucleic acids of four  
genera of sea-urchin, Journal of Biological Chemistry 195: 
155–160 (1952).
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Explain how the sea urchin and salmon data  
demonstrate both of Chargaff’s rules.
2. Using Chargaff’s rules, fill in the table with your predictions of 
the missing percentages of bases, starting with the wheat ge-
nome and proceeding through E. coli, human, and ox. Show how 
you arrived at your answers.
3. If Chargaff’s rule—that the amount of A equals the amount of 
T and the amount of C equals the amount of G—is valid, then 
hypothetically we could extrapolate this to the combined DNA 
of all species on Earth (like one huge Earth genome). To see 
whether the data in the table support this hypothesis, calcu-
late the average percentage for each base in your completed 
table by averaging the values in each column. Does Chargaff’s 
equivalence rule still hold true?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
/uni25B6 Sea urchin
While visiting the laboratory of Maurice Wilkins, Watson 
saw an X-ray diffraction image of DNA produced by Wilkins’s 
accomplished colleague Rosalind Franklin (Figure 16.6). Images 
produced by X-ray crystallography are not actually pictures 
of molecules. The spots in the image were produced by X-rays 
that were diffracted (deflected) as they passed through aligned 
fibers of purified DNA. Watson was familiar with the type of 
X-ray diffraction pattern of helical molecules, and seeing the 
photo that Wilkins showed him confirmed that DNA was 
helical in shape. The photo also added to earlier data obtained 
by Franklin and others suggesting the width of the helix and 
the spacing of the nitrogenous bases along it. The pattern in 
this photo implied that the helix was made up of two strands, 
contrary to a three-stranded model proposed by Linus Pauling 
a short time earlier. The presence of two strands accounts for 
the now-familiar term double helix. DNA is shown in some 
of its many different representations in Figure 16.7.
Watson and Crick began building models of a double helix 
that would conform to the X-ray measurements and what was 
then known about the chemistry of DNA, including Chargaff’s 
rule of base equivalences. Having also read an unpublished 
annual report summarizing Franklin’s work, they knew she 
had concluded that the sugar-phosphate backbones were on 
the outside of the DNA molecule, contrary to their working 
model. Franklin’s arrangement was appealing because it put 
the negatively charged phosphate groups facing the aqueous 
surroundings, while the relatively hydrophobic nitrogenous 
bases were hidden in the interior. Watson constructed such 
a model, in which the two sugar-phosphate backbones are 
antiparallel—that is, their subunits run in opposite direc-
tions (see Figure 16.7). You can imagine the overall arrange-
ment as a rope ladder with rigid rungs. The side ropes represent 
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   368 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 370 ===

Sometimes the 
double-stranded 
DNA molecule is 
shown simply as 
two straight lines.
The “ribbons” in these simpliﬁed double helix 
diagrams represent the sugar-phosphate backbones; 
these models emphasize the 3-D nature of DNA.
DNA can be illustrated in many ways, but all diagrams represent 
the same basic structure. The level of detail shown depends on 
the process or the type of information being conveyed.
Structural Images
5iORNiƂGd+OCgGU
DNA Sequences 
6Je spaceƂlling Oodel on tJe 
left shows the 3-D shape of the 
DNA double helix; the diagram 
on the right shows chemical 
details of DNA’s structure. In 
both images, phosphate groups 
are yellow, deoxyribose sugars 
are blue, and nitrogenous bases 
are shades of green and orange.
When molecular detail is not necessary, DNA is portrayed in a range 
of siOpliƂed diagraOs depending on tJe focus of tJe Ƃgure
Genetic information is carried in DNA as a linear sequence of nucleotides that may be 
transcribed into mRNA and translated into a polypeptide. When focusing on the DNA 
sequence, each nucleotide can be represented simply as the letter of its base: A, T, C, or G.
CG
CG
CG
G
AT
A T
AT
A T
CG
C
T
G 
C
A
A
C 
G
T
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
TA
GC
CG
T
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿ 5¿
3¿5¿
A
5¿3¿
These ﬂattened “ladder style” diagrams of DNA depict the sugar-phosphate 
backbones like the side rails of a ladder, with the base pairs as rungs. Light 
blue is used to indicate the more recently synthesized strand.
O
O
O
O
–O
P
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O–
OH
O
–O
P
5¿ end 3¿ end
5¿ end
3¿ end
O
O
O
O
O–
P
CH2
O
O
O
–O
P
O
O
O
–O
P
O
O
O
O–
P
CH2
O
O
O
O
O
O–
P
CH2
O
–O
O
O–
P
CH2
TA
O
O
O
O
CG
OH
O
O
O
O
AT
DNA
nWENGoVidG
Sugar
Sugar-phosphate
backbone
Here, the two DNA strands are shown untwisted so it’s easier to see 
the chemical details. Note that the strands are antiparallel—they 
are oriented in opposite directions, like the lanes of a divided street.
Nitrogenous base
attached to 1¿ carbon
Phosphate group
attached to 5¿ carbon
3¿5¿
5¿3¿
3¿5¿
One full
turn every
10 base pairs
(3.4 nm)
Bases
0.34 nm
apart
Diameter = 2 nm
Nitrogenous
bases
Sugar-phosphate
backbone
3¿ -  ACGTAAGCGGTTAAT - 5¿
O
O
O
O
GC
Covalent sugar-phosphate bonds 
link nucleotides.
Van der Waals interactions between stacked 
base pairs help hold the molecule together.
Hydrogen bonds between 
bases hold strands together.
5¿ -  TGCATTCGCCAATTA - 3¿
The DNA double helix is 
“right-handed.” Use your 
right hand as shown to 
follow the sugar-phosphate 
backbone up the helix 
and around to the back. 
(It won't work with your 
left hand.)
–OH 
attached to 
3¿ carbon
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
3.Compare the information conveyed in the three ladder diagrams.
1.Describe the bonds that hold together the nucleotides in one DNA strand. 
Then compare them with the bonds that hold the two DNA strands together.
2.How do the two ends of a DNA strand differ in structure?
1¿
2¿3¿
4¿
/uni25BC Figure 16.7  VISUALIZING DNA
 Instructors: Additional questions related to this 
Visualizing Figure can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
DNA Double Helix
 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 369
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   369 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 371 ===

370 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
of guanine equals the amount of cytosine. (Modern DNA-
sequencing techniques have confirmed that the amounts are 
exactly equal.) Although the base-pairing rules dictate the combi-
nations of nitrogenous bases that form the “rungs” of the double 
helix, they do not restrict the sequence of nucleotides along each 
DNA strand. The linear sequence of the four bases can be varied 
in countless ways, and each gene has a unique base sequence.
In April 1953, Watson and Crick surprised the scientific 
world with a succinct, one-page paper that reported their 
molecular model for DNA: the double helix, which has since 
become an icon of molecular biology. Watson and Crick, 
along with Maurice Wilkins, were awarded the Nobel Prize in 
1962 for this work. (Sadly, Rosalind Franklin had died at the 
age of 37 in 1958 and was thus ineligible for the prize.) The 
beauty of the double helix model was that the structure of 
DNA suggested the basic mechanism of its replication.
the sugar-phosphate backbones, and the rungs represent pairs 
of nitrogenous bases. Now imagine twisting the ladder to form 
a helix. Franklin’s X-ray data indicated that the helix makes 
one full turn every 3.4 nm along its length. With the bases 
stacked just 0.34 nm apart, there are ten layers of base pairs, or 
rungs of the ladder, in each full turn of the helix.
The nitrogenous bases of the double helix are paired in 
specific combinations: adenine (A) with thymine (T), and gua-
nine (G) with cytosine (C). It was mainly by trial and error that 
Watson and Crick arrived at this key feature of DNA. At first, 
Watson imagined that the bases paired like with like—for exam-
ple, A with A and C with C. But this model did not fit the X-ray 
data, which suggested that the double helix had a uniform diam-
eter. Why is this requirement inconsistent with like-with-like 
pairing of bases? Adenine and guanine are purines, nitrogenous 
bases with two organic rings, while cytosine and thymine are 
nitrogenous bases called pyrimidines, which have a single ring. 
Pairing a purine with a pyrimidine is the only combination that 
results in a uniform diameter for the double helix (Figure 16.8).
Purine + purine: too wide
Pyrimidine + pyrimidine: too narrow
Purine + pyrimidine: width
consistent with X-ray data
. Figure 16.8 Possible base pairings in the DNA double helix.
CH3
Guanine (G)Cytosine (C)Adenine (A) Thymine (T)
N
N
N
N H
H
N
N O
NSugar
Sugar
H N
N
N
N
N
H
O H
H
N
N O
NSugar
Sugar
H
O H
Nitrogenous base pairs are held 
together by hydrogen bonds.
. Figure 16.9 Base pairing in DNA.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Great  
Discoveries in Science: The Double Helix 
1. Explain why a double-stranded GC-rich polynucleotide 
sequence is more stable than a double-stranded AT-rich 
polynucleotide sequence of the same length.
2. VISUAL SKILLS While trying to develop a vaccine for 
S. pneumonia, Griffith was surprised to discover the 
phenomenon of bacterial transformation. Based on the 
results in the second and third panels of Figure 16.2, what 
result was he expecting in the fourth panel? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 16.1
CONCEPT 16.2
Many proteins work together  
in DNA replication and repair
Hereditary information in DNA directs the development of 
your biochemical, anatomical, physiological, and, to some 
extent, behavioral traits. Your resemblance to your parents has 
its basis in the accurate replication of DNA prior to meiosis and 
therefore its transmission from your parents’ generation to 
yours. Replication prior to mitosis ensures faithful transmission 
of genetic information from a parent cell to two daughter cells.
Of all nature’s molecules, nucleic acids are unique in their 
ability to dictate their own replication from monomers. The 
relationship between structure and function is evident in the 
double helix: The specific complementary pairing of nitroge-
nous bases in DNA has a functional significance. Watson and 
Crick ended their classic paper with this statement: “It has 
not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have pos-
tulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism 
for the genetic material.”1 In this section, you will learn about 
the basic principle of DNA replication, the copying of DNA, 
as well as some important details of the process.
1J. D. Watson and F . H. C. Crick, Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a structure 
for deoxyribose nucleic acids, Nature 171:737–738 (1953).
Watson and Crick reasoned that there must be additional 
specificity of pairing dictated by the structure of the bases. 
Each base has chemical side groups that can form hydrogen 
bonds with its appropriate partner: Adenine can form two 
hydrogen bonds with thymine and only thymine; guanine 
forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine and only cytosine. 
In shorthand, A pairs with T, and G pairs with C (Figure 16.9).
The Watson-Crick model took into account Chargaff’s ratios 
and ultimately explained them. Wherever one strand of a DNA 
molecule has an A, the partner strand has a T. Similarly, a G 
in one strand is always paired with a C in the complementary 
strand. Therefore, in the DNA of any organism, the amount 
of adenine equals the amount of thymine, and the amount 
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   370 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 372 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 371
The Basic Principle: Base Pairing  
to a Template Strand
In a second paper, Watson and Crick stated their hypothesis for 
how DNA replicates: “Now our model for deoxyribonucleic acid 
is, in effect, a pair of templates, each of which is complementary 
to the other. We imagine that prior to duplication the hydrogen 
bonds are broken, and the two chains unwind and separate. Each 
chain then acts as a template for the formation on to itself of a 
new companion chain, so that eventually we shall have two pairs 
of chains, where we only had one before. Moreover, the sequence 
of the pairs of bases will have been duplicated exactly.”2
Figure 16.10 illustrates the basic idea. If you cover a DNA 
strand in Figure 16.10a, its linear sequence of nucleotides is 
revealed by applying the base-pairing rules to the uncovered 
strand. The two strands are complementary; each stores the 
information necessary to reconstruct the other. When a cell 
copies a DNA molecule, each strand serves as a template for 
ordering nucleotides into a new, complementary strand. 
Nucleotides line up along the template strand according to the 
base-pairing rules and are linked to form the new strands. One 
double-stranded DNA molecule becomes two, each an exact 
replica of the “parental” molecule.
This model of DNA replication remained untested for several 
years following publication of the DNA structure. The necessary 
experiments were simple in concept but difficult to perform. 
Watson and Crick’s model predicts that when a double helix 
replicates, each of the two daughter molecules will have one 
old strand, from the parental molecule, and one newly made 
strand. This semiconservative model can be distinguished 
from a conservative model of replication, in which the two paren-
tal strands somehow come back together after the process (that 
is, the parental molecule is conserved). In yet a third model, 
called the dispersive model, all four strands of DNA following 
replication have a mixture of old and new DNA (Figure 16.11).
(a)The parental molecule has two complemen-
tary strands of DNA. Each base is paired by 
hydrogen bonding with its specific partner, 
A with T and G with C.
(b)First, the two DNA strands are separated. 
Each parental strand can now serve as a 
template for a new, complementary 
strand.
(c) Nucleotides complementary to the parental 
(dark blue) strand are connected to form the 
sugar-phosphate backbones of the new 
“daughter” (light blue) strands.  
A
C 
T
A
G
T
G 
A
T
C
A
C 
T
A
G
T
G 
A
T
C
A
C 
T
A
G
T
G 
A
T
C
A
C 
T
A
G
T
G 
A
T
C
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
. Figure 16.10 A model for DNA 
replication: the basic concept. In this 
simplified illustration, a short segment of DNA 
has been untwisted. Simple shapes symbolize 
the four kinds of bases. Dark blue represents 
DNA strands present in the parental molecule; 
light blue represents newly synthesized DNA.
2J. D. Watson and F . H. C. Crick, Genetical implications of the structure of 
deoxyribonucleic acid, Nature 171:964–967 (1953).
 Mastering Biology Animation:  
DNA Replication: An Overview
Parent cell
First
replication
Second
replication
(a) Conservative model. 
The two parental 
strands reassociate 
after acting as 
templates for new 
strands, thus 
restoring the 
parental double 
helix. 
(b) Semiconservative model. 
The two strands 
of the parental 
molecule separate, 
and each functions 
as a template for 
synthesis of a new, 
complementary 
strand.
(c) Dispersive model. 
Each strand of 
both daughter 
molecules con-
tains a mixture of
old and newly 
synthesized DNA. 
. Figure 16.11 DNA replication: three alternative models. 
Each short segment of double helix symbolizes the DNA within a 
cell. Beginning with a parent cell, we follow the DNA for two more 
generations of cells—two rounds of DNA replication. Parental DNA 
is dark blue; newly made DNA is light blue.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   371 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 373 ===

372 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Although mechanisms for conservative or dispersive DNA 
replication are not easy to devise, these models remained 
possibilities until they could be ruled out. After two years of 
preliminary work at the California Institute of Technology in 
the late 1950s, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl devised 
a clever experiment that distinguished between the three 
models, described in Figure 16.12. Their results supported the 
semiconservative model of DNA replication, as predicted by 
Watson and Crick, and their experiment is widely recognized 
among biologists as a classic example of elegant design.
The basic principle of DNA replication is conceptually sim-
ple. However, the actual process involves some complicated 
biochemical gymnastics, as we will now see.
DNA Replication: A Closer Look
The bacterium E. coli has a single chromosome of about 
4.6 million nucleotide pairs. In a favorable environment, an 
E. coli cell can copy all of this DNA and divide to form two geneti-
cally identical daughter cells in considerably less than an hour. 
Each of your somatic cells has 46 DNA molecules in its nucleus, 
one long double-helical molecule per chromosome. In all, that 
represents about 6 billion nucleotide pairs, or over 1,000 times 
more DNA than is found in most bacterial cells. If we were to 
print the one-letter symbols for these bases (A, G, C, and T) the 
size of the type you are now reading, the 6 billion nucleotide pairs 
of information in a diploid human cell would fill about 1,400 
biology textbooks. Yet it takes one of your cells just a few hours 
to copy all of this DNA during S phase of interphase. This replica-
tion of an enormous amount of genetic information is achieved 
with very few errors—only about one per 10 billion nucleotides. 
The copying of DNA is remarkable in its speed and accuracy.
More than a dozen enzymes and other proteins participate 
in DNA replication. Much more is known about how this 
“replication machine” works in bacteria (such as E. coli) than 
in eukaryotes, and we will describe the basic steps of the pro-
cess for E. coli, except where otherwise noted. What scientists 
have learned about eukaryotic DNA replication suggests, 
however, that most of the process is fundamentally similar 
for prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
Getting Started
The replication of chromosomal DNA begins at particular sites 
called origins of replication, short stretches of DNA that 
have a specific sequence of nucleotides. The E. coli chromo-
some, like many other bacterial chromosomes, is circular and 
has a single origin. Proteins that initiate DNA replication recog-
nize this sequence and attach to the DNA, separating the two 
strands and opening up a replication “bubble” (Figure 16.13a). 
Replication of DNA then proceeds in both directions until the 
entire molecule is copied. In contrast to a bacterial chromosome, 
a eukaryotic chromosome may have hundreds or even a few 
thousand replication origins. Multiple replication bubbles form 
and eventually fuse, thus speeding up the copying of the very 
Experiment Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl cultured  
E. coli for several generations in a medium containing nucleo-
tide precursors labeled with a heavy isotope of nitrogen, 15N. 
They then transferred the bacteria to a medium with only 14N, 
a lighter isotope. They took one sample after the first DNA 
replication and another after the second replication. They ex-
tracted DNA from the bacteria in the samples and then centri-
fuged each DNA sample to separate DNA of different densities.
DNA sample
centrifuged 
after first 
replication
3 DNA sample
centrifuged 
after second 
replication
4 Less
dense
More
dense
Bacteria
cultured in
medium
with 15N 
(heavy 
isotope)
Bacteria
transferred 
to medium
with 14N 
(lighter 
isotope)
21
Does DNA replication follow the conservative, 
semiconservative, or dispersive model?
/uni25BC Figure 16.12 Inquiry
Results
Conclusion Meselson and Stahl compared their results to 
those predicted by each of the three models in Figure 16.11, as 
shown below. The first replication in the 14N medium produced 
a band of many molecules of hybrid (15N-14N) DNA. This result 
eliminated the conservative model. The second replication pro-
duced both light and hybrid DNA, a result that refuted the dis-
persive model and supported the semiconservative model. They 
therefore concluded that DNA replication is semiconservative.
First replicationPredictions: Second replication
Dispersive
model
Conservative
model
Semiconservative
model
Data from M. Meselson and F. W. Stahl, The replication of DNA in Escherichia 
coli, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 44:671–682 (1958).
INQUIRY IN ACTION Read and analyze the original paper in 
Inquiry in Action: Interpreting Scientific Papers.
 Instructors: A related Experimental Inquiry Tutorial can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
WHAT IF? If Meselson and Stahl had first grown the cells in 
14N-containing medium and then moved them into 15N-containing 
medium before taking samples, what would have been the result 
after each of the two replications?
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   372 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 374 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 373
long DNA molecules (Figure 16.13b). As in bacteria, eukaryotic 
DNA replication proceeds in both directions from each origin.
At each end of a replication bubble is a replication fork, 
a Y-shaped region where the parental strands of DNA are being 
unwound. Several kinds of proteins participate in the unwind-
ing (Figure 16.14). Helicases are enzymes that untwist the 
double helix at the replication forks, separating the two paren-
tal strands and making them available as template strands. 
After the parental strands separate, single-strand binding 
proteins bind to the unpaired DNA strands, keeping them 
from re-pairing. The untwisting of the double helix causes 
tighter twisting and strain ahead of the replication fork. 
Topoisomerase is an enzyme that helps relieve this strain by 
breaking, swiveling, and rejoining DNA strands.
Synthesizing a New DNA Strand
The unwound sections of parental DNA strands are now 
available to serve as templates for the synthesis of new 
complementary DNA strands. However, the enzymes that  
(a) Origin of replication in an E. coli cell (b) Origins of replication in a eukaryotic cell
Origin of replicationOrigin of 
replication
Double-
stranded
DNA molecule
Double-stranded DNA molecule
Two daughter
DNA molecules
Parental (template) strand
Bubble
Parental (template) strand
Replication fork
Replication fork
Replication
bubble
Two daughter DNA molecules
Daughter (new) strand
Daughter (new) strand
In a linear chromosome of a eukaryote, replication bubbles form at 
many sites along the giant DNA molecule during S phase of interphase. 
The bubbles expand as replication proceeds in both directions (red 
arrows). Eventually, the bubbles fuse and synthesis of the daughter 
strands is complete. The TEM shows three replication bubbles along the 
DNA of a cultured Chinese hamster cell.
The circular chromosome of E. coli and other bacteria has only one 
origin of replication. The parental strands separate there, forming 
a replication bubble with two forks (red arrows). Replication 
proceeds in both directions until the forks meet on the other side, 
resulting in two daughter DNA molecules. The TEM shows a 
bacterial chromosome with a replication bubble.
0.5 om
0.25 om
. Figure 16.13 Origins of replication in E. coli and eukaryotes. The red arrows indicate the 
movement of the replication forks and thus the overall directions of DNA replication within each bubble.
DRAW IT In the TEM, add arrows in the forks of the third bubble.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: The Replication Fork in E. coli
RNA
primer
Replication 
fork
Topoisomerase breaks, swivels,
and rejoins the parental DNA
ahead of the replication fork,
relieving the strain caused by
unwinding.
Single-strand binding
proteins stabilize the un-
wound parental strands.
Helicase unwinds 
and separates
the parental 
DNA strands.
Primase synthesizes RNA 
primers, using the parental 
DNA as a template.
5¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
. Figure 16.14 Some of the proteins involved in the 
initiation of DNA replication. The same proteins function at both 
replication forks in a replication bubble. For simplicity, only the left-
hand fork is shown, and the DNA bases are drawn much larger in 
relation to the proteins than they are in reality.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   373 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 375 ===

374 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
of a divided street (see Figure 16.15). Therefore, the two new 
strands formed during DNA replication must also be antipar-
allel to their template strands.
The antiparallel arrangement of the double helix, together 
with a constraint on the function of DNA polymerases, has 
an important effect on how replication occurs. Because of 
their structure, DNA polymerases can add nucleotides only 
to the free 3/uni2032 end of a primer or growing DNA strand, never 
to the 5/uni2032 end (see Figure 16.15). Thus, a new DNA strand can 
elongate only in the 5/uni2032S3/uni2032 direction. With this in mind, 
let’s examine one of the two replication forks in a bubble 
(Figure 16.16). Along one template strand, DNA polymerase 
III can synthesize a complementary strand continuously by 
elongating the new DNA in the mandatory 5/uni2032S3/uni2032 direction. 
DNA pol III remains in the replication fork on that template 
strand and continuously adds nucleotides to the new comple-
mentary strand as the fork progresses. The DNA strand made 
by this mechanism is called the leading strand. Only one 
primer is required for DNA pol III to synthesize the entire 
leading strand (see Figure 16.16).
To elongate the other new strand of DNA in the manda-
tory 5/uni2032S3/uni2032 direction, DNA pol III must work along the other 
template strand in the direction away from the replication 
fork. The DNA strand elongating in this direction is called the 
lagging strand. In contrast to the leading strand, which 
elongates continuously, the lagging strand is synthesized 
discontinuously, as a series of segments. These segments of 
the lagging strand are called Okazaki fragments, after Reiji 
Okazaki, the Japanese scientist who discovered them. The 
fragments are about 1,000–2,000 nucleotides long in E. coli 
and 100–200 nucleotides long in eukaryotes.
synthesize DNA cannot initiate the synthesis of a poly-
nucleotide; they can only add DNA nucleotides to the end 
of an already existing chain that is base-paired with the 
template strand. An initial nucleotide chain that can be used 
as a pre-existing chain is produced during DNA synthesis; 
this is actually a short stretch of RNA, not DNA. The RNA 
chain is called a primer and is synthesized by the enzyme 
primase (see Figure 16.14). Primase starts a complementary 
RNA chain with a single RNA nucleotide and adds RNA 
nucleotides one at a time, using the parental DNA strand 
as a template. The completed primer, generally five to 
ten nucleotides long, is thus base-paired to the template 
strand. The new DNA strand will start from the 3/uni2032 end of 
the RNA primer.
Enzymes called DNA polymerases catalyze the synthesis 
of new DNA by adding nucleotides to the 3/uni2032 end of a pre-
existing chain. In E. coli, there are several DNA polymerases, 
but two of them appear to play the major roles in DNA 
replication: DNA polymerase III and DNA polymerase I. The 
situation in eukaryotes is more complicated, with at least 11 
different DNA polymerases discovered so far, although the 
general principles are the same.
Most DNA polymerases require a primer and a DNA tem-
plate strand, along which complementary DNA nucleotides 
are lined up, one by one. In E. coli, DNA polymerase III (abbre-
viated DNA pol III) adds a DNA nucleotide to the RNA primer 
and then continues adding DNA nucleotides, which are 
complementary to the parental DNA template strand, to the 
growing end of the new DNA strand. The rate of elongation 
is about 500 nucleotides per second in bacteria and 50 per 
second in human cells.
Each nucleotide to be added to a growing DNA strand 
consists of a sugar attached to a base and to three phosphate 
groups. You have already encountered such a molecule—ATP 
(adenosine triphosphate; see Figure 6.9). The only difference 
between the ATP of energy metabolism and dATP, the adenine 
nucleotide used to make DNA, is the sugar component, which 
is deoxyribose in the building block of DNA but ribose in ATP. 
Like ATP, the nucleotides used for DNA synthesis are chemi-
cally reactive, partly because their triphosphate tails have an 
unstable cluster of negative charge. DNA polymerase catalyzes 
the addition of each monomer to the growing end of a DNA 
strand by a condensation reaction in which two phosphate 
groups are lost as a molecule of pyrophosphate (P—Pi). 
Subsequent hydrolysis of the pyrophosphate to two molecules 
of inorganic phosphate (Pi) is a coupled exergonic reaction 
that helps drive the polymerization reaction (Figure 16.15).
Antiparallel Elongation
As we have noted previously, the two ends of a DNA strand 
are different, giving each strand directionality, like a one-way 
street (see Figure 16.5). In addition, the two strands of DNA 
in a double helix are antiparallel, meaning that they are ori-
ented in opposite directions to each other, like the two sides 
AT
CG
GC
T
A
C
OH
OH
Base
Sugar
Phosphate
New strand Template strand
AT
CG
GC
A
C
OH
DNA 
poly-
merase
5¿ 3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
T
Incoming nucleotide
Pyro-
phosphate
PPi
P2i
PP
P
. Figure 16.15 Addition of a nucleotide to a DNA strand. 
DNA polymerase catalyzes addition of a nucleotide to the 3/uni2032 end 
of a growing DNA strand, with the release of two phosphates.
DRAW IT Circle the area where the new bond was made.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   374 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 376 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 375
RNA primer
Site where 
replication begins
Sliding clamp
DNA pol III
Parental DNA
Single-strand binding proteins
Helicase
Origin of replicationOverview
Overall directions
of replication
Leading strand
Lagging strand
Lagging strandTemplate
strand
Leading strand
Primer
     After an RNA primer is made,
DNA pol III starts to synthesize
the leading strand.
1
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
     The leading strand is
elongated continuously
in the 5¿: 3¿ direction
as helicase opens up the 
fork further to the left.
2
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
. Figure 16.16 Synthesis of the leading strand during DNA 
replication. This diagram focuses on the left replication fork shown 
in the overview box. DNA polymerase III (DNA pol III), shaped like a 
cupped hand, is shown closely associated with a protein called the 
“sliding clamp” that encircles the newly synthesized double helix 
like a doughnut. The sliding clamp moves DNA pol III along the 
DNA template strand.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Synthesis of the 
Leading Strand
Figure 16.17 illustrates the steps in the synthesis of the 
lagging strand at one fork. Whereas only one primer is 
required on the leading strand, each Okazaki fragment on the 
lagging strand must be primed separately (steps 1 and 4). 
After DNA pol III forms an Okazaki fragment (steps 2 to 4), 
another DNA polymerase, DNA pol I, replaces the RNA nucle-
otides of the adjacent primer with DNA nucleotides one at a 
time (step 5). But DNA pol I cannot join the final nucleotide 
of this replacement DNA segment to the first DNA nucleotide 
of the adjacent Okazaki fragment. Another enzyme, DNA 
ligase, accomplishes this task, joining the sugar-phosphate 
backbones of all the Okazaki fragments into a continuous 
DNA strand (step 6).
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Synthesis  
of the Lagging Strand
3¿
12
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
Template
strand
Site where
replication
begins
Primer for
leading 
strand
RNA primer
for fragment 1
RNA primer
for fragment 2
Okazaki fragment 1
Okazaki 
fragment 2
      DNA ligase forms 
a bond between the
newest DNA and the
DNA of fragment 1.
6
      Fragment 2 is primed.  
Then DNA pol III adds DNA 
nucleotides, detaching when it 
reaches the fragment 1 primer.
4
      The lagging
strand in this region
is now complete.
7
      DNA pol III adds
DNA nucleotides to
the primer, forming
Okazaki fragment 1.
2
      After reaching the
next RNA primer to
the right, DNA pol III
detaches.
3
      Primase joins RNA
nucleotides into the first
primer for the lagging
strand.
1
Overall direction of replication
1
2
3¿
5¿3¿
5¿
1
2
3¿
5¿3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
5¿
1
2
1
1
Origin of replication
Overall directions
of replication
Leading strand Lagging strand
Leading strandTemplate strand
      DNA pol I replaces the RNA
with DNA, adding nucleotides 
to the 3¿ end of fragment 1 
(and, later, of fragment 2).
5
Overview
. Figure 16.17 Synthesis of the lagging strand.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   375 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 377 ===

376 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
molecular brake, slowing progress of the replication fork and 
coordinating the placement of primers and the rates of repli-
cation on the leading and lagging strands. Second, the DNA 
replication complex may not move along the DNA; rather, 
the DNA may move through the complex during the replica-
tion process. In eukaryotic cells, multiple copies of the com-
plex, perhaps grouped into “factories,” may be anchored to 
the nuclear matrix, a framework of fibers extending through 
the interior of the nucleus. 
Some experimental evidence supports a model in which 
two DNA polymerase molecules, one on each template 
strand, “reel in” the parental DNA and extrude newly made 
daughter DNA molecules. In this so-called trombone model, 
the lagging strand is also looped back through the complex 
(Figure 16.19). Whether the complex moves along the DNA 
or whether the DNA moves through the complex, either 
anchored or not, are still open, unresolved questions that are 
under active investigation.
Synthesis of the leading strand and synthesis of the lagging 
strand occur concurrently and at the same rate. The lagging 
strand is so named because its synthesis is delayed slightly 
relative to synthesis of the leading strand; each new fragment 
of the lagging strand cannot be started until enough template 
has been exposed at the replication fork.
Figure 16.18 and Table 16.1 summarize DNA replication. 
Please study them carefully before proceeding.
The DNA Replication Complex
It is traditional—and convenient—to represent DNA poly-
merase molecules as locomotives moving along a DNA rail-
road track, but such a model is inaccurate in two important 
ways. First, the various proteins that participate in DNA rep-
lication actually form a single large complex, a “DNA replica-
tion machine.” Many protein-protein interactions facilitate 
the efficiency of this complex. For example, by interacting 
with other proteins at the fork, primase apparently acts as a 
DNA pol III
Leading strand
Leading strand
template
Lagging strand
template
Lagging strand
DNA pol III
Parental DNA
DNA pol I DNA ligase
PrimasePrimer
5¿
5¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
      Helicase
unwinds the
parental
double helix.
1
      Molecules of single-
strand binding protein
stabilize the unwound
template strands.
2
      The leading strand is
synthesized continuously
in the 5¿ to 3¿ direction
by DNA pol III.
3
65
      Primase begins synthesis
of the RNA primer for the 
fifth Okazaki fragment.
4
      DNA ligase joins the 
3¿ end of fragment 2
to the 5¿ end of 
fragment 1.
7
123
4
5
Origin of replication
Overview
Overall directions
of replication
Leading strand
Lagging strand
Lagging strand
Leading strand
      DNA pol III is completing 
synthesis of fragment 4. When 
it reaches the RNA primer on 
fragment 3, it will detach and 
begin adding DNA nucleotides  
to the 3¿ end of the fragment 5 
primer in the replication fork.
      DNA pol I removes the primer 
from the 5¿ end of fragment 2, 
replacing it with DNA nucleotides 
added one by one to the 3¿ end of 
fragment 3. After the last addition, 
the backbone is left with a free 
3¿ end.
. Figure 16.18 A summary of bacterial DNA replication. The detailed diagram shows the left-hand 
replication fork of the replication bubble shown in the overview (upper right). Viewing each daughter strand in 
its entirety in the overview, you can see that half of it is made continuously as the leading  
strand, while the other half (on the other side of the origin) is synthesized in fragments  
as the lagging strand.
DRAW IT Draw a diagram 
showing the right-hand fork of the 
bubble in this figure. Number the 
Okazaki fragments, and label all  
5/uni2032 and 3/uni2032 ends.
 Mastering Biology Animation: DNA Replication: A Closer Look
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   376 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 378 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 377
Parental DNA
Helicase
Leading strand
Leading strand template
Lagging strand
Connecting protein
DNA pol III
Lagging 
strand 
template
DNA pol III
5¿
3¿
3¿ 5¿
5¿ 3¿
5¿
Overall direction of replication
3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
. Figure 16.19 The “trombone” model of the DNA 
replication complex. In this proposed model, two molecules 
of DNA polymerase III work together in a complex, one on each 
strand, with helicase and other proteins. The lagging strand 
template DNA loops through the complex, resembling the slide 
of a trombone.
DRAW IT Draw a line tracing the lagging strand template in this figure.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: DNA Replication
Table 16.1  Bacterial DNA Replication Proteins and Their 
Functions
Protein Function
Helicase    
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿ Unwinds parental double helix at 
replication forks
Single-strand binding 
protein       
 5¿ 3¿
Binds to and stabilizes single-
stranded DNA until it is used as a 
template
Topoisomerase
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
Relieves overwinding strain ahead 
of replication forks by breaking, 
swiveling, and rejoining DNA strands
Primase
5¿5¿
3¿
3¿
Synthesizes an RNA primer at 5/uni2032 end 
of leading strand and at 5/uni2032 end of 
each Okazaki fragment of lagging 
strand
DNA pol III
3¿
3¿5¿
5¿
Using parental DNA as a template, 
synthesizes new DNA strand by 
adding nucleotides to an RNA 
primer or a pre-existing DNA strand
DNA pol I
3¿5¿
3¿ 5¿
Removes RNA nucleotides of primer 
from 5/uni2032 end and replaces them with 
DNA nucleotides added to 3/uni2032 end of 
adjacent fragment
DNA ligase
 Joins Okazaki fragments of lagging 
strand; on leading strand, joins 3/uni2032 
end of DNA that replaces primer to 
rest of leading strand DNA
Proofreading and Repairing DNA
We cannot attribute the accuracy of DNA replication solely to 
the specificity of base pairing. Initial pairing errors between 
incoming nucleotides and those in the template strand 
occur at a rate of one in 105 nucleotides. However, errors in 
the completed DNA molecule amount to only one in 1010 
(10 billion) nucleotides, an error rate that is 100,000 times 
lower. This is because during DNA replication, many DNA 
polymerases proofread each nucleotide against its template 
as soon as it is covalently bonded to the growing strand. 
Upon finding an incorrectly paired nucleotide, the poly-
merase removes the nucleotide and then resumes synthesis. 
(This action is similar to fixing a texting error by deleting the 
wrong letter and then entering the correct one.)
Mismatched nucleotides sometimes evade proofreading 
by a DNA polymerase. In mismatch repair, other enzymes 
remove and replace incorrectly paired nucleotides that have 
resulted from replication errors. Researchers highlighted the 
importance of such repair enzymes when they found that a 
hereditary defect in one of them is associated with a form of 
colon cancer. Apparently, this defect allows cancer-causing 
errors to accumulate in the DNA faster than normal.
Incorrectly paired or altered nucleotides can also arise 
after replication. In fact, maintenance of the genetic 
information encoded in DNA requires frequent repair of 
various kinds of damage to existing DNA. DNA molecules 
are constantly subjected to potentially harmful chemi -
cal and physical agents, such as X-rays, as we’ll discuss 
in Concept 17.5. In addition, DNA bases may undergo 
spontaneous chemical changes under normal cellular 
conditions. However, these changes in DNA are usually 
corrected before they become permanent changes—
mutations—perpetuated through successive replications. 
Each cell continuously monitors and repairs its genetic 
material. Because repair of damaged DNA is so important 
to the survival of an organism, it is no surprise that many 
different DNA repair enzymes have evolved. Almost 100 
are known in E. coli, and about 170 have been identified 
so far in humans.
Most cellular systems for repairing incorrectly paired 
nucleotides, whether they are due to DNA damage or to 
replication errors, use a mechanism that takes advantage of 
the base-paired structure of DNA. In many cases, a segment 
of the strand containing the damage is cut out (excised) by 
a DNA-cutting enzyme—a nuclease—and the resulting 
gap is then filled in with nucleotides, using the undam-
aged strand as a template. The enzymes involved in filling 
the gap are a DNA polymerase and DNA ligase. There are 
several such DNA repair systems; one is called nucleotide 
excision repair.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   377 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 379 ===

378 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
copies. As we mentioned earlier, a permanent change in the 
DNA sequence is called a mutation.
Mutations can change the phenotype of an organism (see 
Concept 17.5). And if they occur in germ cells, which give 
rise to gametes, mutations can be passed on from generation 
to generation. The vast majority of such changes either have 
no effect or are harmful, but a very small percentage can be 
beneficial. In either case, mutations are the original source 
of the variation on which natural selection operates during 
evolution and are ultimately responsible for the appearance 
of new species. (You’ll learn more about this process in Unit 
Four.) The balance between complete fidelity of DNA replica-
tion or repair and a low mutation rate has resulted in new 
proteins that contribute to different phenotypes. Ultimately, 
over long periods of time, this process leads to new species 
and thus to the rich diversity of life on Earth today.
Replicating the Ends of DNA Molecules
For linear DNA, such as the DNA of eukaryotic chromosomes, 
the usual replication machinery cannot complete the 5/uni2032 ends 
of daughter DNA strands because there is no 3/uni2032 end of a preex-
isting polynucleotide for DNA polymerase to add onto. This is 
another consequence of the enzyme’s requirements. Even if an 
Okazaki fragment can be started with an RNA primer hydrogen-
bonded to the very end of the template strand, once that primer 
is removed, it cannot be replaced with DNA because there is 
no 3/uni2032 end available for nucleotide addition (Figure 16.21). As 
a result, repeated rounds of replication produce shorter and 
shorter DNA molecules with uneven (“staggered”) ends.
Most prokaryotes have a circular chromosome, with 
no ends, so the shortening of DNA does not occur. But 
what protects the genes of linear eukaryotic chromosomes 
from being eroded away during successive rounds of DNA 
replication? Eukaryotic chromosomal DNA molecules have 
special nucleotide sequences called telomeres at their ends  
(Figure 16.22). Telomeres do not contain genes; instead, the 
DNA typically consists of multiple repetitions of one short 
nucleotide sequence. In each human telomere, for example, 
the six-nucleotide sequence TTAGGG is repeated between 
100 and 1,000 times.
Telomeres have two protective functions. First, specific 
proteins associated with telomeric DNA prevent the stag-
gered ends of the daughter molecule from activating the 
cell’s systems for monitoring DNA damage. (Staggered ends 
of a DNA molecule, which often result from double-strand 
breaks, can trigger signal transduction pathways leading to 
cell cycle arrest or cell death.) Second, telomeric DNA acts as 
a kind of buffer zone that provides some protection against 
the organism’s genes shortening, somewhat like how the 
plastic-wrapped ends of a shoelace slow down its unraveling. 
Telomeres do not prevent the erosion of genes near the ends 
of chromosomes; they merely postpone it.
An example is shown in Figure 16.20. An important 
function of the DNA repair enzymes in our skin cells is to 
repair genetic damage caused by the UV rays of sunlight: 
For example, adjacent thymine bases on a DNA strand 
can become covalently linked into thymine dimers, caus-
ing the DNA to buckle and interfere with DNA replication. 
The importance of repairing this kind of damage is under-
scored by a disorder called xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), 
which in most cases is caused by an inherited defect in a 
nucleotide excision repair enzyme. Individuals with XP 
are hypersensitive to sunlight; mutations in their skin cells 
caused by ultraviolet light are left uncorrected, often result-
ing in skin cancer. The effects are extreme: Without sun 
protection, children who have XP can develop skin cancer 
by age 10.
Evolutionary Significance of Altered DNA 
Nucleotides
EVOLUTION Faithful replication of the genome and repair 
of DNA damage are important for the functioning of the 
organism and for passing on a complete, accurate genome 
to the next generation. The error rate after proofreading and 
repair is extremely low, but rare mistakes do slip through. 
Once a mismatched nucleotide pair is replicated, the 
sequence change is permanent in the daughter molecule that  
has the incorrect nucleotide as well as in any subsequent 
1
      Repair synthesis by
a DNA polymerase
Ƃlls in tJe Oissing
nucleotides using tJe
undaOaged strand 
as a template.
3
      &0# ligase seals tJe
free end of the new DNA
to tJe old &0# OaMing tJe
strand complete.
4
      A nuclease enzyme cuts
tJe daOaged &0# strand at 
tYo points and tJe daOaged
section is removed.
Nuclease 2
DNA
ligase
DNA
polymerase
      Teams of enzymes detect 
and repair daOaged &0# 
such as this thymine dimer 
(often caused by ultraviolet 
radiation), which distorts 
the DNA molecule.
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
. Figure 16.20 Nucleotide excision repair of DNA damage.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   378 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 380 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 379
5¿
End of
lagging strand
End of
parental strand
New leading strand
New lagging strand
RNA primer
Last fragment Next-to-last fragment
Removal of primers and
replacement with DNA
where a 3¿ end is available
Second round
of replication
Further rounds
of replication 
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
Primer removed but
cannot be replaced
with DNA because
no 3¿ end available
for DNA polymerase
5¿
3¿
Ends of parental
DNA strands
Leading strand
Lagging strand
Shorter and shorter
daughter molecules
. Figure 16.21 Shortening of the ends of linear DNA 
molecules. Here we follow the left end of one DNA molecule 
through two rounds of replication. After the first round, the new 
lagging strand is shorter than its template. After a second round, 
both the leading and lagging strands have become shorter than the 
original parental DNA. Although not shown here, the other ends of 
these chromosomal DNA molecules (not shown) also become shorter.
As shown in Figure 16.21, telomeres become shorter dur-
ing every round of replication. Thus, as expected, telomeric 
DNA tends to be shorter in dividing somatic cells of older 
individuals and in cultured cells that have divided many 
times. It has been proposed that shortening of telomeres is 
somehow connected to the aging process of certain tissues 
and even to aging of the organism as a whole.
But what about germ cells, whose genome must persist 
virtually unchanged from an organism to its offspring 
over many generations? If the chromosomes of germ cells 
became shorter in every cell cycle, essential genes would 
eventually be missing from the gametes they produce. 
However, this does not occur: An enzyme called telomerase 
catalyzes the lengthening of telomeres in eukaryotic germ 
1 om
. Figure 16.22 Telomeres. Eukaryotes have repetitive, noncoding 
sequences called telomeres at the ends of their DNA. Telomeres are 
stained orange in these mouse chromosomes (LM).
CONCEPT CHECK 16.2
1. What might happen during the replication of DNA if  
topoisomerase is inhibited?
2. How do immortal cells cope with the shortening of  
telomeres to be able to divide indefinitely?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS What is the relationship between DNA 
replication and the S phase of the cell cycle? See Figure 12.6.
4. VISUAL SKILLS If the DNA pol I in a given cell were non-
functional, how would that affect the synthesis of a leading 
strand? In the overview box in Figure 16.18, point out where 
DNA pol I would normally function on the top leading strand.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
cells, thus restoring their original length and compensat-
ing for the shortening that occurs during DNA replication. 
This enzyme contains its own RNA molecule that it uses 
as a template to artificially “extend” the leading strand, 
allowing the lagging strand to maintain a given length. 
Telomerase is not active in most human somatic cells, but 
its activity varies from tissue to tissue. The activity of telom-
erase in germ cells results in telomeres of maximum length 
in the zygote.
Normal shortening of telomeres may protect organ-
isms from cancer by limiting the number of divisions that 
somatic cells can undergo. Cells from large tumors often 
have unusually short telomeres, as we would expect for cells 
that have undergone many cell divisions. Further shorten-
ing would presumably lead to self-destruction of the tumor 
cells. Telomerase activity is abnormally high in cancerous 
somatic cells, suggesting that its ability to stabilize telomere 
length may allow these cancer cells to persist. Many can-
cer cells do seem capable of unlimited cell division, as do 
immortal strains of cultured cells (see Concept 12.3). For 
several years, researchers have studied inhibition of telomer-
ase as a possible cancer therapy. While studies that inhibited 
telomerase in mice with tumors have led to the death of  
cancer cells, eventually the cells have restored the length of 
their telomeres by an alternative pathway. This is an area  
of ongoing research that may eventually yield useful cancer 
treatments.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   379 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 381 ===

380 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
single linear DNA molecule associated with a large number of 
proteins. In E. coli, the chromosomal DNA consists of about 
4.6 million nucleotide pairs, representing about 4,400 genes. 
This is 100 times more DNA than is found in a typical virus, 
but only about one-thousandth as much DNA as in a human 
somatic cell. Even so, that is a tremendous amount of DNA to 
be packaged in such a small container.
Stretched out, the DNA of an E. coli cell would measure 
about a millimeter in length, 1,000 times longer than the 
region it occupies in the cell. Within a bacterium, however, 
certain proteins cause the chromosome to coil and “super-
coil,” densely packing it so that it fills only part of the cell. 
DNA double helix
(2 nm in diameter)
Histones
Nucleosome
(10 nm in diameter)
Histone tail
DNA
DNA, the Double Helix
Shown below is a ribbon model of DNA, 
with each ribbon representing one of the 
polynucleotide strands. The TEM shows a 
molecule of naked (protein-free) DNA; the 
double helix is 2 nm across.
Histones
Proteins called histones are responsi-
ble for the main level of DNA packing 
in interphase chromatin. More than a 
fifth of a histone’s amino acids are 
positively charged (Lys or Arg) and 
therefore bind tightly to the 
negatively charged DNA.
    Four types of histones are most 
common in chromatin. The histones 
are very similar among eukaryotes, 
probably reflecting their important 
role in chromatin structure.
Nucleosomes in a 10-nm Fiber
In electron micrographs, unfolded 
chromatin is roughly 10 nm in diame-
ter (the 10-nm fiber). Such chromatin 
resembles beads on a string (see the 
TEM). Each “bead” is a nucleosome, 
the basic unit of DNA packing; the 
“string” between beads is called linker 
DNA.
     A nucleosome consists of DNA 
wound twice around a protein core of 
eight histones, two each of the four 
main histone types. The amino end of 
each histone (the histone tail) extends 
outward from the nucleosome and 
is involved in regulation of gene 
expression.
    In the cell cycle, the histones leave 
the DNA only briefly during DNA 
replication. Generally, they do the 
same during the process of transcrip-
tion, which requires access to the DNA 
by  transcription proteins.
Euchromatin/Heterochromatin
A recent technique called ChromEMT 
allows scientists to visualize chromatin 
in intact cells. ChromEMT and other 
new techniques have shown that the 
10-nm fiber is the basic constituent of 
interphase chromatin.
    During interphase, different regions 
of a chromosome may exist as euchro-
matin (below left) or heterochromatin 
(below). In euchromatin, the 10-nm 
fiber is loosely arranged in a more 
open configuration than heterochro-
matin; higher degrees of organization, 
including the 30-nm fiber in one older 
model, may exist in specific cells or at 
certain times. (This is an area of very 
active research.) The DNA in euchro-
matin is accessible to the proteins that 
carry out transcription, and its genes 
can be expressed. In heterochromatin, 
the 10-nm fiber is more densely 
arranged and less accessible to these 
proteins; genes in heterochromatin are 
generally not expressed.
    Euchromatin and heterochromatin 
are organized into regions by other 
proteins not shown here; this organi-
zation is dynamic but disappears once 
mitosis begins.
Heterochromatin (densely arranged 10-nm fiber)Euchromatin (loosely arranged 10-nm fiber)
. Figure 16.23  Exploring Chromatin Packing in a Eukaryotic Chromosome
CONCEPT 16.3
A chromosome consists of a DNA 
molecule packed together with 
proteins
Now let’s examine how DNA is packaged into chromosomes, 
the structures that carry genetic information. The main com-
ponent of the genome in most bacteria is a double-stranded, 
circular DNA molecule that is associated with specific pro-
teins. A bacterial chromosome differs from a eukaryotic 
chromosome in that a eukaryotic chromosome consists of a 
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   380 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 382 ===

 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 381
In the cell, eukaryotic DNA is precisely combined with 
a large amount of protein. The exact way in which this 
complex of DNA and protein, called chromatin, fits into 
the nucleus has long been debated. Figure 16.23 outlines 
the current view of the organization of chromatin during 
interphase and how it is condensed during mitosis into the 
metaphase chromosome. Study this figure carefully before 
reading further.
Chromatin undergoes striking changes in how densely it 
is packed during the course of the cell cycle (see Figure 12.7). 
In interphase cells stained for light microscopy, the 
Loops
of DNA
(10-nm fiber)
Replicated
chromosome
(1,400 nm)
Condensin II
scaffold
Condensin I
Prophase
When mitosis begins, DNA replication 
has already occurred, so each chromo-
some consists of two sister chromatids. 
During prophase, the chromatin of 
each sister chromatid begins to 
condense. Two related proteins called 
condensin II and condensin I play 
important roles. First, condensin II 
proteins (red) bind to the 10-nm fiber 
of DNA and form DNA loops that get 
larger and larger. The condensin II 
proteins form a central scaffold from 
which the loops extend. As the loops 
grow, the chromosome gets wider and 
shorter. By the 
end of prophase, 
the chromosome 
is half as long.
Prometaphase
When prometaphase begins, conden-
sin I proteins (green) bind to DNA 
outside the central scaffold, making 
smaller loops (not shown) out of the 
larger loops generated by condensin II. 
The process continues, with more and 
more loops extending outward, and 
the chromosome getting denser, 
shorter, and wider. The scaffold itself 
also begins to twist into a helix 
(suggested by the curved gray arrows), 
allowing even more loops per given 
length of chromosome. 
Metaphase
At metaphase, the chromosome is at 
its most dense, with the most loops 
per turn, and therefore is at its shortest 
length. The two sister chromatids are 
fully condensed.
Sister chromatid
(700 nm)
Unlike the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell, this dense region of 
DNA in a bacterium, called the nucleoid, is not bounded by 
membrane (see Figure 7.5).
Each eukaryotic chromosome contains a single linear 
DNA double helix that, in humans, averages about 1.5*108 
nucleotide pairs. This is an enormous amount of DNA rela-
tive to a chromosome’s condensed length. If completely 
stretched out, such a DNA molecule would be about 4 cm 
long, thousands of times the diameter of a cell nucleus—and 
that’s not even considering the DNA of the other 45 human 
chromosomes!
 Mastering Biology Animation: DNA Packing
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   381 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 383 ===

382 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
chromatin usually appears as a diffuse mass within the 
nucleus, with some denser clumps, including in regions of 
centromeres and telomeres. The less compacted, more dis-
persed interphase chromatin is called euchromatin (“true 
chromatin”) to distinguish it from the more compacted, 
denser-appearing heterochromatin (see Figure 16.23). 
Recent research has clarified our understanding of chromatin 
structure: For both types of chromatin, the basic organizing 
unit is the 10-nm fiber—nucleosomes joined by linker DNA. 
In heterochromatin, this 10-nm fiber is folded and bent 
back on itself to a much greater degree than in euchromatin, 
accounting for its denser appearance. Because heterochro-
matin is so compacted, it is largely inaccessible to the pro-
teins responsible for transcribing the genetic information, a 
crucial early step in gene expression. In contrast, the looser 
packing of euchromatin makes its DNA accessible to those 
proteins, and the genes present in euchromatin are available 
for transcription.
Early on, biologists assumed that interphase chroma-
tin was a tangled mass in the nucleus, like a bowl of spa-
ghetti, but this is far from the case. Although an interphase 
chromosome lacks an obvious scaffold, there are proteins 
that further organize the 10-nm fiber into larger compart-
ments and smaller looped domains. Some of the looped 
domains appear to be attached to the nuclear lamina, on 
the inside of the nuclear envelope, and perhaps also to 
fibers of the nuclear matrix. These attachments may help 
organize regions of chromatin where genes are active. 
The chromatin of each chromosome occupies a specific 
restricted area within the interphase nucleus, and the chro-
matin fibers of different chromosomes do not appear to be 
entangled (Figure 16.24a).
As a cell prepares for mitosis, its chromatin becomes orga-
nized into loops and coils, eventually condensing into a char-
acteristic number of short, thick metaphase chromosomes 
that are distinguishable from each other with the light micro-
scope (Figure 16.24b).
The chromosome is a dynamic structure that is condensed, 
loosened, modified, and remodeled as necessary for various 
cell processes, including DNA replication, mitosis, meiosis, and 
gene expression. Certain chemical modifications of histones 
affect the state of chromatin condensation and also have mul-
tiple effects on gene expression, as you’ll see in Concept 18.2.
In this chapter, you have learned how DNA molecules are 
arranged in chromosomes and how DNA replication provides 
the copies of genes that parents pass to offspring. However, 
it is not enough that genes be copied and transmitted; the 
information they carry must be used by the cell. In other 
words, genes must also be expressed. In the next chapter, we 
will examine how the cell expresses the genetic information 
encoded in DNA.
(b) These metaphase chromosomes have been “painted” so that the two 
homologs of a pair are the same color. On the left is a spread of treated 
chromosomes; on the right, they have been organized into a karyotype.
(a) The ability to visually distinguish among chromosomes makes it 
possible to see how the chromosomes are arranged in the interphase 
nucleus. Each chromosome appears to occupy a specific territory 
during interphase. In general, the two homologs of a pair are not 
located together.
5 om
. Figure 16.24 “Painting” chromosomes. Researchers can treat 
(“paint”) human chromosomes with molecular tags that cause each 
chromosome pair to appear a different color.
MAKE CONNECTIONS If you arrested a human cell in metaphase I 
of meiosis and applied this technique, what would you observe? How 
would this differ from what you would see in metaphase of mitosis? 
Review Figure 13.8 and Figure 12.7.
CONCEPT CHECK 16.3
1. Describe the structure of a nucleosome, the basic unit of 
DNA packing in eukaryotic cells.
2. How does euchromatin differ from heterochromatin in 
structure and function?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Interphase chromosomes appear 
to be attached to the nuclear lamina and perhaps also the 
nuclear matrix. Describe these two structures. See Figure 7.9 
and the associated text.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   382 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 384 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
A chromosome consists of a DNA molecule packed 
together with proteins (pp. 380–382)
• The chromosome of most bacterial species is a circular DNA mol-
ecule with some associated proteins, making up the nucleoid. 
• The chromatin making up a eukaryotic chromosome is com-
posed of DNA, histones, and other proteins. The histones bind 
to each other and to the DNA to form nucleosomes, the most 
basic units of DNA packing, which exist as part of the 10-nm fiber. 
Histone tails extend outward from each bead-like nucleosome 
core. Additional coiling and folding lead ultimately to the highly 
condensed chromatin of the metaphase chromosome.
• Chromosomes occupy restricted areas in the interphase nucleus. 
In interphase cells, most 10-nm fiber chromatin is loosely 
arranged (euchromatin), but some is more densely arranged 
(heterochromatin). Euchromatin, but not heterochromatin, 
is generally accessible for gene transcription.
? Describe the levels of chromatin packing you’d expect to see in an 
interphase nucleus.
CONCEPT 16.1
DNA is the genetic material (pp. 365–370)
• Experiments with bacteria and with phages provided the first 
strong evidence that the genetic material is DNA.
• Watson and Cr ic k deduced t hat DNA is a double helix and built a 
structural model. Two antiparallel sugar-phosphate chains wind 
around the outside of the molecule; the nitrogenous bases project 
into the interior, where they  
hydrogen-bond in specific  
pairs, A with T, G with C.
CONCEPT 16.2
Many proteins work together in DNA replication and 
repair (pp. 370–379)
• The Meselson-Stahl experiment showed that DNA replication 
is semiconservative: The parental molecule unwinds, and each 
strand then serves as a template for the synthesis of a new strand 
according to base-pairing rules.
• DNA replication at one replication fork is summarized here:
DNA pol III starts DNA
synthesis at 3¿ end of primer,
continues in 5¿ : 3¿ direction
DNA pol III synthesizes
leading strand continuously
DNA pol I replaces the RNA
primer with DNA nucleotides
Origin of
replication
Primase synthesizes
a short RNA primer
Helicase
Parental 
DNA
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
Lagging strand is synthesized 
in short Okazaki fragments, 
later joined by DNA ligase
• DNA polymerases proofread new DNA, replacing incorrect 
nucleotides. In mismatch repair, enzymes correct errors that 
persist. Nucleotide excision repair is a process by which 
nucleases cut out and other enzymes replace damaged stretches 
of DNA.
• The ends of eukaryotic chromosomal DNA get shorter with each 
round of replication. The presence of telomeres, repetitive  
sequences at the ends of linear DNA molecules, postpones the  
erosion of genes. T elomerase catalyzes the lengthening of telomeres 
in germ cells.
? Compare DNA replication on the leading and lagging strands, 
including similarities and differences.
CONCEPT 16.3
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
9. MAKE CONNECTIONS Although the proteins that cause the 
E. coli chromosome to coil are not histones, what property 
would you expect them to share with histones, given their 
ability to bind to DNA (see Figure 5.14)?
10. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Some bacteria may be able to 
respond to environmental stress by increasing the rate at 
which mutations occur during cell division. How might this be 
accomplished? Might there be an evolutionary advantage to 
this ability? Explain.
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY
DRAW IT Model building can be an important part of the 
scientific process. The illustration shown above is a computer-
generated model of a DNA replication complex. The parental 
and newly synthesized DNA strands are color-coded differently, 
as are each of the following three proteins: DNA pol III, the 
sliding clamp, and single-strand binding protein.
(a) Using what you’ve learned in this chapter to clarify this 
model, label each DNA strand and each protein.
(b) Draw an arrow to indicate the overall direction of DNA 
replication.
 CHAPTER 16  Nucleic Acids and Inheritance 383
16 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
CG
CG
CG
G
AT
AT
A T
CG
C
Nitrogenous bases
Hydrogen bond
Sugar-phosphate backbone
? What does it mean when we say that the two DNA strands in the 
double helix are antiparallel? What would an end of the double helix 
look like if the strands were parallel?
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–8 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   383 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 385 ===

384 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION The continuity 
of life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA, 
and structure and function are correlated at all levels of 
biological organization. In a short essay (100–150 words), 
describe how the structure of DNA is correlated with its role as 
the molecular basis of inheritance.
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This image shows DNA (gray) interacting with a computer-
generated model of a TAL protein (multicolored), one of a 
family of proteins found only in a species of the bacterium 
Xanthomonas. The bacterium uses proteins like this one to find 
specific gene sequences in cells of the organisms it infects, such 
as tomatoes, rice, and citrus fruits. Given what you know about 
DNA structure and considering the image above, discuss how 
the TAL protein’s structure suggests that it functions.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C16_PRF.indd   384 3/21/20   1:50 AM

=== SIDE 386 ===

385
Figure 17.1 A population of albino donkeys grazes on vegetation on the hillsides 
of Asinara, an Italian island. Several centuries ago, a recessive mutation that disables 
pigment synthesis arose in the DNA of one donkey and was passed down through 
the generations. Inbreeding has resulted in a large number of homozygous albino 
donkeys living on the island today.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 17
• BioFlix® Animation: Protein Synthesis
• Figure 17.27 Walkthrough: Types of 
Small-Scale Mutations that Affect mRNA 
Sequence
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Protein Synthesis 
(1 of 3): Overview
• Tutorial: CRISPR: A Revolution in 
Genome Editing
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module 
(in Instructor Resources)
• Gene Expression: Mutations (Concept 17.5)
17.1 Genes specify proteins via 
transcription and translation p. 386
17.2 Transcription is the DNA-directed 
synthesis of RNA: A Closer Look p. 392
17.3 Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after 
transcription p. 395
17.4 Translation is the RNA-directed 
synthesis of a polypeptide: A Closer 
Look p. 397
17.5 Mutations of one or a few 
nucleotides can affect protein 
structure and function p. 407
KEY CONCEPTS
Expression of Genes17
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Sketch the 
process shown below, and add labels 
and details as you read the chapter. 
(In this exercise, assume all processes 
take place in a eukaryotic cell.)
How can one change in DNA result in such
a dramatic change in appearance?
Proteins are the link between genotype and phenotype. Gene expression
is the process by which DNA directs the synthesis of proteins:
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
mRNAmRNA
Protein: Enzyme 
required for pigment 
synthesis
Protein: Enzyme 
required for pigment 
synthesis does not work
Genotype: DNA Genotype: DNA
Gene for pigmentation Gene for pigmentation
with mutation
Phenotype:
Brown pigment
Phenotype:
No pigment
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   385 3/21/20   2:08 AM

=== SIDE 387 ===

386 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
CONCEPT 17.1
Genes specify proteins via 
transcription and translation
Inherited traits like albinism are determined by genes, which 
have information content in the form of specific sequences of 
nucleotides along stretches of DNA, the genetic material. The 
DNA inherited by an organism leads to specific traits by dictat-
ing the synthesis of proteins and of RNA molecules involved in 
protein synthesis. In the case of coat and skin color, the gene 
containing the information to synthesize an enzyme that makes 
pigment allows normal coloring, and a faulty version of that 
gene leads to lack of color, or the albino phenotype. Proteins are 
the link between genotype and phenotype. Gene expression 
is the process by which DNA directs the synthesis of proteins (or, 
in some cases, just RNAs). The expression of genes that code for 
proteins includes two stages: transcription and translation.
Before going into the details of how genes direct protein 
synthesis, let’s step back and examine how the fundamental 
relationship between genes and proteins was discovered.
Evidence from Studying Metabolic Defects
In 1902, British physician Archibald Garrod was the first to sug-
gest that genes dictate phenotypes through enzymes, proteins 
that catalyze specific chemical reactions in the cell. He postu-
lated that the symptoms of an inherited disease reflect an inabil-
ity to make a particular enzyme. He later referred to such diseases 
as “inborn errors of metabolism.” For example, people with a 
disease called alkaptonuria have black urine because it contains 
a chemical called alkapton, which darkens upon exposure to air. 
Garrod reasoned that these people cannot make an enzyme that 
breaks down alkapton, so alkapton is expelled in their urine.
Several decades later, research supported Garrod’s hypothesis 
that a gene dictates the production of a specific enzyme, later 
named the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis. Biochemists learned 
that cells synthesize and degrade most organic molecules via 
metabolic pathways, in which each chemical reaction in a 
sequence is catalyzed by a specific enzyme (see Concept 6.1). 
Such metabolic pathways lead, for instance, to the synthesis of 
the pigments that give the brown donkey in Figure 17.1 its fur 
color or fruit flies (Drosophila) their eye color (see Figure 15.3). 
In the 1930s, the American biochemist and geneticist George 
Beadle and his French colleague Boris Ephrussi speculated that in 
Drosophila, each mutation affecting eye color blocks pigment syn-
thesis at a specific step by preventing production of the enzyme 
that catalyzes that step. But neither the chemical reactions nor 
the enzymes that catalyze them were known at the time.
Nutritional Mutants in Neurospora: Scientific Inquiry
A breakthrough in demonstrating the relationship between 
genes and enzymes came a few years later at Stanford 
University, where Beadle and Edward Tatum began work-
ing with a bread mold, Neurospora crassa. Unlike the diploid 
organisms studied by Mendel (peas) and T. H. Morgan (fruit 
flies), Neurospora is a haploid species. Because its genome 
contains only one copy of each gene, that single copy deter-
mines the individual’s expressed phenotype. Therefore, when 
Beadle and Tatum wanted to discover the function of any 
gene, they only needed to mutate and disable that one allele. 
They chose to study the protein-coding genes required for a 
specific nutritional activity. They caused mutations in genes 
by bombarding Neurospora with X-rays and looked among the 
survivors for mutants that differed in their nutritional needs 
from the wild-type bread mold.
Wild-type Neurospora has modest food requirements. It can 
grow in the laboratory on minimal medium—a simple solution 
containing minimal nutrients for growth—inorganic salts, 
glucose, and the vitamin biotin—incorporated into agar, a sup-
port medium. From these basics, wild-type mold cells use their 
metabolic pathways to produce all the other nutrient mol-
ecules (like amino acids) they need for growth, dividing repeat-
edly and forming visible colonies of genetically identical cells. 
As shown in Figure 17.2, Beadle and Tatum generated different 
“nutritional mutants” of Neurospora cells, each of which had a 
mutation in one gene and was unable to synthesize a particular 
Growth
Control: Wild-type cells
growing on
minimal medium
Minimal
medium
+ arginine
Minimal
medium
+ valine
Minimal
medium
+ lysine
No 
growth
Neurospora
cells
1Individual Neurospora cells 
were placed on complete 
medium.
2The cells were subjected to 
X-rays to induce a mutation 
in one gene per cell.
4Cells from each colony were 
placed in a vial with only 
minimal medium. Cells that 
did not grow were identified 
as nutritional mutants.
5Cells from one nutritional mutant 
colony were placed in a series of 
vials, each containing minimal 
medium plus one additional nutrient.
6The vials were observed for growth. In this example, the mutant 
cells grew only on minimal medium + arginine, indicating that this 
mutant was missing the enzyme for the synthesis of arginine.
3Each surviving cell 
formed a colony of 
genetically identical cells.
. Figure 17.2 Beadle and Tatum’s experimental approach. 
To obtain nutritional mutants, Beadle and Tatum exposed 
Neurospora cells to X-rays, inducing mutations, then screened for 
(tested for) mutants that had new nutritional requirements, such 
as arginine, as shown here.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   386 3/21/20   2:08 AM

=== SIDE 388 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 387
chains, and each polypeptide is specified by its own gene. For 
example, hemoglobin—the oxygen-transporting protein of 
vertebrate red blood cells—contains two kinds of polypep-
tides, and thus two genes code for this protein, one for each 
type of polypeptide (see Figure 5.18). Beadle and Tatum’s 
idea was therefore restated as the one gene–one polypeptide 
hypothesis. Even this description is not entirely accurate, 
though. First, in many cases, a eukaryotic gene can code for a 
set of closely related polypeptides via a process called alterna-
tive splicing, which you will learn about later in this chapter. 
Second, quite a few genes code for RNA molecules that have 
important functions in cells even though they are never 
translated into protein. For now, we will focus on genes that 
do code for polypeptides. (Note that it is common to refer to 
these gene products as proteins—a practice you will encoun-
ter in this book—rather than more precisely as polypeptides.)
Basic Principles of Transcription  
and Translation
Genes provide the instructions for making specific proteins, 
but a gene does not build a protein directly. The bridge 
between DNA and protein synthesis is the nucleic acid RNA. 
RNA is chemically similar to DNA except that it contains ribose 
instead of deoxyribose as its sugar and has the nitrogenous 
base uracil rather than thymine (see Figure 5.23). Thus, each 
nucleotide along a DNA strand has A, G, C, or T as its base, and 
each nucleotide along an RNA strand has A, G, C, or U as its 
base. An RNA molecule usually consists of a single strand.
We often describe the flow of information from gene to 
protein in terms of languages. Just as specific sequences of let-
ters communicate information in a language such as English, 
specific sequences of monomers convey information in 
polymers like nucleic acids and proteins. In DNA or RNA, the 
monomers are the four types of nucleotides listed previously, 
which differ in their nitrogenous bases. Genes are typically 
hundreds or thousands of nucleotides long, each gene hav-
ing a specific sequence of nucleotides. Each polypeptide of 
a protein also has monomers arranged in a particular linear 
order (the protein’s primary structure; see Figure 5.18), but 
its monomers are amino acids. Thus, nucleic acids and pro-
teins contain information written in two different chemical 
languages. Getting from DNA to protein involves two major 
stages: transcription and translation.
Transcription is the synthesis (production) of RNA using 
information in the DNA. The two nucleic acids are written in 
different forms of the same language, and the information is 
simply transcribed, or “rewritten,” from DNA to RNA. Just as 
a DNA strand provides a template for making a new comple-
mentary strand during DNA replication (see Concept 16.2), it 
also can serve as a template for assembling a complementary 
sequence of RNA nucleotides. For a protein-coding gene, the 
resulting RNA molecule is a faithful transcript of the gene’s 
essential nutrient. Such cells could not grow on minimal 
medium but could grow on complete medium, which contains 
all nutrients needed for growth. For Neurospora, the complete 
medium consists of the minimal medium supplemented with 
all 20 amino acids and a few other nutrients. Beadle and Tatum 
hypothesized that in each nutritional mutant, the gene for 
the enzyme that synthesizes a particular nutrient had been 
disabled by the mutation. They were able to determine experi-
mentally which nutrient each mutant strain (original cell and 
its descendants) was unable to synthesize.
This approach resulted in a valuable collection of mutant 
strains of Neurospora, each catalogued by its defect in a par-
ticular pathway. Two colleagues, Adrian Srb and Norman 
Horowitz, used a collection of arginine-requiring mutants to 
investigate the biochemical pathway for arginine synthesis in 
Neurospora (Figure 17.3). Srb and Horowitz pinned down each 
mutant’s defect more specifically, using additional tests to dis-
tinguish among three classes of arginine-requiring mutants. 
Mutants in each class required a different set of compounds 
along the arginine-synthesizing pathway, which has three 
steps. These results, and those of many similar experiments 
done by Beadle and Tatum, suggested that each class was 
blocked at a different step in this pathway because mutants in 
that class lacked the enzyme that catalyzes the blocked step.
Because Beadle and Tatum set up their experimental con-
ditions so that each mutant was defective in a single gene, 
the collected results, taken together, provided strong sup-
port for the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis, as they dubbed 
it: that the function of a gene is to dictate the production of 
a specific enzyme. Further support for this hypothesis came 
from experiments that identified the specific enzymes lack-
ing in the mutants. Beadle and Tatum shared a Nobel Prize in 
1958 for “their discovery that genes act by regulating definite 
chemical events” (in the words of the Nobel committee).
Today, we know of countless examples in which a muta-
tion in a gene causes a faulty enzyme that in turn leads to an 
identifiable condition. The albino donkeys in Figure 17.1 lack 
a key enzyme called tyrosinase in the metabolic pathway that 
produces melanin, a dark pigment. The absence of melanin 
causes white fur and other effects throughout the donkey’s 
body. Its nose, ears, and hooves, as well as its eyes, are pink 
because no melanin is present to mask the reddish color of 
the blood vessels that run through those structures.
The Products of Gene Expression: A Developing Story
As researchers learned more about proteins, they made revi-
sions to the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis. First of all, 
not all proteins are enzymes. Keratin, the structural protein 
of animal hair, and the hormone insulin are two examples of 
nonenzyme proteins. Because proteins that are not enzymes 
are nevertheless gene products, molecular biologists began to 
think in terms of one gene–one protein. However, many pro-
teins are constructed from two or more different polypeptide 
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   387 3/21/20   2:08 AM

=== SIDE 389 ===

388 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
WHAT IF? Suppose the experiment had shown that class I mutants could grow only in MM 
supplemented by ornithine or arginine and that class II mutants could grow in MM supplemented by 
citrulline, ornithine, or arginine. What conclusions would the researchers have drawn from those results 
regarding the biochemical pathway and the defect in class I and class II mutants?
. Figure 17.3 Inquiry
Do individual genes specify the enzymes that function in a biochemical pathway?
Experiment W o r k i n g  w i t h  t h e  m o l d  Neurospora crassa, Adrian Srb and Norman Horowitz, then 
at Stanford University, used Beadle and Tatum’s experimental approach (see Figure 17.2) to isolate 
mutants that required arginine in their growth medium. The researchers showed that these mutants 
fell into three classes, each defective in a different gene. From studies by others on mammalian liver 
cells, they suspected that the metabolic pathway of arginine biosynthesis involved a precursor nutri-
ent and the intermediate molecules ornithine and citrulline, as shown in the diagram on the right.
Precursor
Ornithine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Citrulline
Arginine
Their most famous experiment, shown here, tested both the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis and 
their postulated arginine-synthesizing pathway. In this experiment, they grew their three classes of 
mutants under the four different conditions shown in the results table below. They included minimal 
medium (MM) as a control, knowing that wild-type cells could grow on MM but mutant cells could not. 
(See test tubes below.)
Control: Minimal medium
Growth:
Wild-type
cells can grow 
and divide.
No growth:
Mutant cells
cannot grow
and divide.
Wild type Class I mutants
Classes of Neurospora crassa
Class II mutants Class III mutants
Minimal 
medium
(MM)
(control)
MM +
ornithine
MM +
citrulline
MM +
arginine
(control)
Can grow with or
without any
supplements
Summary
of results
Can grow on
ornithine, citrulline,
or arginine
Can grow only on
citrulline or
arginine
Require arginine 
to grow
Condition
Results Table
Results As shown in the table 
on the right, the wild-type strain 
was capable of growth under all 
experimental conditions, requir-
ing only the minimal medium. The 
three classes of mutants each had a 
specific set of growth requirements. 
For example, class II mutants could 
not grow when ornithine alone was 
added but could grow when either 
citrulline or arginine was added.
Wild type
Gene 
(codes for 
enzyme)
Class I mutants
(mutation in
gene A)
Class II mutants
(mutation in
gene B)
Class III mutants
(mutation in
gene C)
Gene A
Gene B
Gene C
Precursor
Ornithine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Citrulline
Arginine
Precursor
Ornithine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Citrulline
Arginine
Precursor
Ornithine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Citrulline
Arginine
Precursor
Ornithine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Citrulline
Arginine
Enzyme A
Enzyme B
Enzyme C
Conclusion F r o m  t h e  g r o w t h  r e-
quirements of the mutants, Srb and 
Horowitz deduced that each class of 
mutant was unable to carry out one 
step in the pathway for synthesiz-
ing arginine, presumably because 
it lacked the necessary enzyme, as 
shown in the table on the right. 
Because each of their mutants was 
mutated in a single gene, they con-
cluded that each mutated gene must 
normally dictate the production of 
one enzyme. Their results supported 
the one gene–one enzyme hypoth-
esis, proposed by Beadle and Tatum, 
and also confirmed that the arginine 
pathway described in the mammalian 
liver also operates in Neurospora. 
(Notice in the results table that a mu-
tant can grow only if supplied with a 
compound made after the defective 
step because this bypasses the defect.)
Data from A. M. Srb and N. H. Horowitz, The or-
nithine cycle in Neurospora and its genetic con-
trol, Journal of Biological  
Chemistry 154:129–139 (1944).
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   388 3/21/20   2:08 AM

=== SIDE 390 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 389
(see Concept 26.2). Still, these exceptions do not discredit 
the idea that, in general, genetic information flows from 
DNA to RNA to protein. In the next section, we discuss how 
the instructions for assembling amino acids into a specific 
order are encoded in nucleic acids.
protein-building instructions. This type of RNA molecule 
is called messenger RNA (mRNA) because it carries a 
genetic message from the DNA to the protein-synthesizing 
machinery of the cell. (Transcription is the general term for 
the synthesis of any kind of RNA on a DNA template. Later, 
you will learn about some other types of RNA produced by 
transcription.)
Translation is the synthesis of a polypeptide using the 
information in the mRNA. During this stage, there is a change 
in language: The cell must translate the nucleotide sequence 
of an mRNA molecule into the amino acid sequence of a poly-
peptide. The sites of translation are ribosomes, molecular 
complexes that facilitate the orderly linking of amino acids 
into polypeptide chains.
Transcription and translation occur in all organisms. 
Because most studies have involved bacteria and eukaryotic 
cells, they are our main focus in this chapter. Our understand-
ing of transcription and translation in archaea lags behind, 
but we do know that archaeal cells share some features of 
gene expression with bacteria and others with eukaryotes.
The basic mechanics of transcription and translation are 
similar for bacteria and eukaryotes, but there is an impor-
tant difference in the flow of genetic information within 
the cells. Bacteria do not have nuclei. Therefore, nuclear 
membranes do not separate bacterial DNA and mRNA from 
ribosomes and the other protein-synthesizing equipment 
(Figure 17.4a). This lack of compartmentalization allows 
translation of an mRNA to begin while its transcription 
is still in progress, as you’ll see later. By contrast, eukary-
otic cells have nuclei. The presence of a nuclear envelope 
separates transcription from translation in space and time 
(Figure 17.4b). Transcription occurs in the nucleus, but the 
mRNA must be transported to the cytoplasm for translation. 
In eukaryotes, before RNA transcripts from protein-coding 
genes can leave the nucleus, they are modified in various 
ways to produce the final, functional mRNA. The transcrip-
tion of a protein-coding eukaryotic gene results in pre-mRNA, 
and further RNA processing yields the finished mRNA. The 
initial RNA transcript from any gene, including those speci-
fying RNA that is not translated into protein (such as tRNA 
and rRNA, which will be described in Concept 17.4), is more 
generally called a primary transcript.
To summarize: Genes program protein synthesis via 
genetic messages in the form of messenger RNA. Put another 
way, cells are governed by a molecular chain of command 
with a directional flow of genetic information:
DNA RNA Protein
This idea, that the flow of information went only one 
way, was named the central dogma by Francis Crick in 1956. 
In the 1970s, however, scientists were surprised to discover 
some enzymes that use RNA molecules as templates for DNA 
synthesis, an example of information flow from RNA to DNA 
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
TRANSLATION
DNA
mRNANUCLEUS
CYTOPLASM
Pre-mRNA
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
DNA
mRNA
Polypeptide
Ribosome
Nuclear
envelope
Polypeptide
Ribosome
Bacterial cell. In a bacterial cell, which lacks a nucleus, 
mRNA produced by transcription is immediately 
translated without additional processing.
Eukaryotic cell. The nucleus provides a separate 
compartment for transcription. The original RNA 
transcript, called pre-mRNA, is processed in various 
ways before leaving the nucleus as mRNA.
CYTOPLASM
(b)
(a)
. Figure 17.4 Overview: the roles of transcription and 
translation in the flow of genetic information. In a cell, 
inherited information flows from DNA to RNA to protein. The two 
main stages of information flow are transcription and translation. 
A miniature version of part (a) or (b) accompanies several figures 
later in the chapter as an orientation diagram to help you see where 
a particular figure fits into the overall scheme of gene expression.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Overview of Protein Synthesis in Bacteria  
Animation: Overview of Protein Synthesis in Eukaryotes
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   389 3/21/20   2:08 AM

=== SIDE 391 ===

390 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
the template strand of DNA. (To review what is meant by 
“antiparallel” and the 5′ and 3′ ends of a nucleic acid chain, 
see Figure 16.7.) In the example in Figure 17.5, the nucleo-
tide triplet ACC along the DNA template strand (written as 
3′@ACC@5′) provides a template for 5′@UGG@3′ in the mRNA 
molecule. The mRNA nucleotide triplets are called codons, 
and they are customarily written in the 5′ S 3′ direction. 
In our example, UGG is the codon for the amino acid tryp-
tophan (abbreviated Trp, or W). The term codon is also used 
for the DNA nucleotide triplets along the nontemplate strand. 
These codons are complementary to the template strand and 
thus identical in sequence to the mRNA (except for T’s instead 
of U’s). For this reason, the nontemplate DNA strand is often 
called the coding strand; by convention, the sequence of 
the coding strand is used when a gene’s sequence is reported.
During translation, the sequence of codons along an 
mRNA molecule is decoded, or translated, into a sequence 
of amino acids making up a polypeptide chain. The codons 
are read by the translation machinery in the 5′ S 3′ 
The Genetic Code
When biologists began to suspect that the instructions for pro-
tein synthesis were encoded in DNA, they recognized a problem: 
There are only four nucleotide bases to specify 20 amino acids. 
Thus, the genetic code cannot be a language like Chinese, where 
each written symbol corresponds to a word. How many nucleo-
tides, then, would turn out to correspond to an amino acid?
Codons: Triplets of Nucleotides
If each kind of nucleotide base were translated into an amino 
acid, only four amino acids could be specified, one per nucle-
otide base. Would a language of two-letter code words suffice? 
The two-nucleotide sequence AG, for example, could specify 
one amino acid, and GT could specify another. Since there 
are four possible nucleotide bases in each position, this would 
give us 16 (that is, 4*4, or 42) possible arrangements—still 
not enough to code for all 20 amino acids.
Triplets of nucleotide bases are the smallest units of 
uniform length that can code for all the amino acids. If 
each arrangement of three consecutive nucleotide bases 
specifies an amino acid, there can be 64 (that is, 43) possible 
code words—more than enough to specify all the amino 
acids. Experiments have verified that the flow of informa-
tion from gene to protein is based on a triplet code: The 
genetic instructions for a polypeptide chain are written in 
the DNA as a series of nonoverlapping, three-nucleotide 
words. The series of words in a gene is transcribed into a 
complementary series of nonoverlapping, three-nucleotide 
words in mRNA, which is then translated into a chain of 
amino acids (Figure 17.5).
During transcription, the gene determines the sequence 
of nucleotide bases along the length of the RNA molecule 
that is being synthesized. For each gene, only one of the 
two DNA strands is transcribed. This strand is called the 
template strand because it provides the pattern, or 
template, for the sequence of nucleotides in an RNA tran-
script. For any given gene, the same strand is used as the 
template every time that gene is transcribed. However, far-
ther along on the same chromosomal DNA molecule, the 
opposite strand may function as the template for a differ-
ent gene. Particular DNA sequences associated with a gene 
determine how the enzyme that transcribes genes is ori-
ented when it binds, and this establishes which strand will 
be used as the template.
An mRNA molecule is complementary rather than 
identical to its DNA template because RNA nucleotides are 
assembled on the template according to base-pairing rules 
(see Figure 17.5). The pairs are similar to those that form 
during DNA replication, except that U (the RNA substi-
tute for T) pairs with A and the mRNA nucleotides contain 
ribose instead of deoxyribose. Like a new strand of DNA, the 
RNA molecule is synthesized in an antiparallel direction to 
5¿3¿
3¿5¿
Trp Phe Gly Ser
Amino acid
DNA
template 
strand
Non-
template
(coding)
strand
Codon
Protein
mRNA
A
T
A
T
A
T
A
T
A
T
C
G
C
G
C
G
G
C
G
C
T
A
C
G
3¿5¿U       UU UUUG GGC CAG
Gene 1
DNA
molecule
Gene 2
Gene 3
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
. Figure 17.5 The triplet code. For each gene, 
one DNA strand functions as a template for 
transcription of RNAs, such as mRNA. The base-
pairing rules for DNA synthesis also guide 
transcription, except that RNA is made 
with uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). 
During translation, the mRNA is read as 
a sequence of nucleotide triplets, called 
codons. Each codon specifies an amino 
acid to be added to the growing 
polypeptide chain. The mRNA is read 
in the 5′ S 3′ direction.
VISUAL SKILLS By convention, the nontemplate strand, also called the 
coding strand, is used to represent a DNA sequence. Write the sequence 
of the mRNA strand and the nontemplate strand—in both cases reading 
from 5′ to 3′—and compare them. Why do you think this convention 
was adopted? (Hint: Why is this called the coding strand?)
 Mastering Biology MP3 Tutor: DNA to RNA to Protein
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   390 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 392 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 391
will probably be gibberish: for example, “her edd oga tet heb 
ug.” The reading frame is also important in the molecular 
language of cells. The short stretch of polypeptide shown 
in Figure 17.5, for instance, will be made correctly only if 
the mRNA nucleotides are read from left to right (5′ S 3′) 
in the groups of three shown in the figure: UGG UUU GGC 
UCA. Although a genetic message is written with no spaces 
between the codons, the cell’s protein-synthesizing machin-
ery reads the message as a series of nonoverlapping three-
letter words. The message is not read as a series of overlapping 
words—UGGUUU, and so on—which would convey a very 
different message.
Evolution of the Genetic Code
EVOLUTION The genetic code is nearly universal, shared 
by organisms from the simplest bacteria to the most complex 
plants and animals. The mRNA codon CCG, for instance, is 
translated as the amino acid proline in all organisms whose 
direction along the mRNA. Each codon specifies which 
one of the 20 amino acids will be incorporated at the corre-
sponding position along a polypeptide. Because codons are 
nucleotide triplets, the number of nucleotides making up a 
genetic message must be three times the number of amino 
acids in the protein product. For example, 300 nucleotides 
along an mRNA strand code for 100 amino acids in the 
polypeptide it encodes.
Cracking the Code
Molecular biologists cracked the genetic code of life in the 
early 1960s when a series of elegant experiments disclosed 
the amino acid translations of each of the mRNA codons. The 
first codon was deciphered in 1961 by Marshall Nirenberg, of 
the National Institutes of Health, and colleagues. They syn-
thesized an artificial mRNA made up of only uracil-bearing 
nucleotides, thus containing only one codon (UUU) over 
and over. When added to a test-tube mixture that contained 
all 20  amino acids, ribosomes, and the other components 
required for protein synthesis, the “poly-U” mRNA was trans-
lated into a polypeptide containing many units of the phe-
nylalanine (Phe, or F) amino acids, strung together as a poly-
phenylalanine chain. Thus, Nirenberg determined that the 
mRNA codon UUU specifies the amino acid phenylalanine. 
Soon, the amino acids specified by the codons AAA, GGG, 
and CCC were similarly identified.
Although more elaborate techniques were required to 
decode mixed triplets such as AUA and CGA, all 64 codons 
were deciphered by the mid-1960s. As Figure 17.6 shows, 61 
of the 64 triplets code for amino acids. The other three codons 
act as “stop” signals, or termination codons, marking the end 
of translation. Notice that the codon AUG has a dual func-
tion: It codes for the amino acid methionine (Met, or M) and 
also functions as a “start” signal, or initiation codon. Genetic 
messages usually begin with the mRNA codon AUG, which 
signals the protein-synthesizing machinery to begin translat-
ing the mRNA at that location. (Because AUG also stands for 
methionine, polypeptide chains all begin with methionine 
when they are synthesized. However, an enzyme may subse-
quently remove this starter amino acid from the chain.)
Notice in Figure 17.6 that there is redundancy in the 
genetic code, but no ambiguity. For example, although 
codons GAA and GAG both specify glutamic acid (redun-
dancy), neither of them ever specifies any other amino acid 
(no ambiguity). The redundancy in the code is not altogether 
random. In many cases, codons that are synonyms for a par-
ticular amino acid differ only in the third nucleotide base of 
the triplet. We will see why this is later in the chapter.
Our ability to extract the intended message from a writ-
ten language depends on reading the symbols in the correct 
groupings—that is, in the correct reading frame. Consider 
this statement: “The red dog ate the bug.” Group the letters 
incorrectly by starting at the wrong point, and the result 
UCU
UCC
UCA
UCG
UAU
UAC
UGU
UGC
UGG  Trp (W)
UUU
UUC
UUA
UUG
Phe
(F)
Leu
(L)
Tyr
(Y)
Cys
(C)Ser
(S)
CUU
CUC
CUA
CUG
CCU
CCC
CCA
CCG
Pro
(P)
CAU
CAC
CAA
CAG
His
(H)
Gln
(Q)
CGU
CGC
CGA
CGG
Arg
(R)
Ile
(I)
AUU
AUC
AUA
ACU
ACC
ACA
ACG
Thr
(T)
AAU
AAC
AAA
AAG
Asn
(N)
Lys
(K)
AGU
AGC
AGA
AGG
GGU
GGC
GGA
GGG
Gly
(G)
Ser
(S)
Arg
(R)
GAU
GAC
GAA
GAG
Asp
(D)
Glu
(E)
GCU
GCC
GCA
GCG
Ala
(A)
Val
(V)
GUU
GUC
GUA
GUG
UAA   Stop
UAG   Stop
UGA   Stop
AUGMet (M) 
or start
Leu
(L)
U C A G
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
First mRNA base  (5¿ end of codon)
Second mRNA base
Third mRNA base  (3¿ end of codon)
. Figure 17.6 The codon table for mRNA. The three nucleotide 
bases of an mRNA codon are designated here as the first, second, 
and third bases, reading in the 5′ S 3′ direction along the mRNA. 
The codon AUG not only stands for the amino acid methionine 
(Met, or M) but also functions as a “start” signal for ribosomes 
to begin translating the mRNA at that point. Three of the 64 
codons function as “stop” signals, marking where ribosomes end 
translation. Both one- and three-letter codes are shown for the 
amino acids; see Figure 5.14 for their full names.
VISUAL SKILLS A segment in the middle of an mRNA has the 
sequence 5′-AGAGAACCGCGA-3′. Using the codon table, translate this 
sequence, assuming the first three nucleotides are a codon.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Translation: The Genetic Code
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   391 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 393 ===

392 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Transcription is the DNA-directed 
synthesis of RNA: A Closer Look
Now that we have considered the linguistic logic and evo-
lutionary significance of the genetic code, we are ready to 
reexamine transcription, the first stage of gene expression, 
in greater detail.
Molecular Components of Transcription
Messenger RNA, the carrier of information from DNA to 
the cell’s protein-synthesizing machinery, is transcribed 
from the template strand of a gene. An enzyme called an 
RNA polymerase pries the two strands of DNA apart and 
joins together RNA nucleotides complementary to the DNA 
template strand, thus elongating the RNA polynucleotide 
(Figure 17.8). Like the DNA polymerases that function in 
DNA replication, RNA polymerases can assemble a polynu-
cleotide only in its 5′ S 3′ direction, adding onto its 3′ end. 
Unlike DNA polymerases, however, RNA polymerases are able 
to start a chain from scratch; they don’t need to add the first 
nucleotide onto a pre-existing primer.
Specific sequences of nucleotides along the DNA mark 
where transcription of a gene begins and ends. The DNA 
sequence where RNA polymerase attaches and initiates tran-
scription is known as the promoter; in bacteria, the sequence 
that signals the end of transcription is called the terminator. 
(The termination mechanism in eukaryotes will be described 
later.) Molecular biologists refer to the direction of transcrip-
tion as “downstream” and the other direction as “upstream.” 
These terms are also used to describe the positions of nucleo-
tide sequences within the DNA or RNA. Thus, the promoter 
sequence in DNA is said to be upstream from the terminator. 
The stretch of DNA downstream from the promoter that is tran-
scribed into an RNA molecule is called a transcription unit.
Bacteria have a single type of RNA polymerase that synthe-
sizes not only mRNA but also other types of RNA that func-
tion in gene expression, such as ribosomal RNA. In contrast, 
eukaryotes have at least three types of RNA polymerase in 
their nuclei; the one used for pre-mRNA synthesis is called 
RNA polymerase II. The other RNA polymerases transcribe 
RNA molecules that are not translated into protein. In the 
discussion that follows, we start with the features of mRNA 
synthesis common to both bacteria and eukaryotes and then 
describe some key differences.
Synthesis of an RNA Transcript
The three stages of transcription, as shown in Figure 17.8 and 
described next, are initiation, elongation, and termination of 
the RNA chain. Study Figure 17.8 to familiarize yourself with 
the stages and the terms used to describe them.
(a) Tobacco plant expressing a 
firefly gene. The yellow glow is 
produced by a chemical reaction 
catalyzed by the protein product 
of the firefly gene.
(b) Mosquito larva expressing 
a jellyfish gene. The gene codes 
for green fluorescent protein (GFP) 
and is inserted into organisms as 
a reporter gene so researchers 
can tell if a gene of interest is 
being expressed.
. Figure 17.7 Evidence for evolution: expression of genes 
from different species. Because diverse forms of life share a 
common genetic code due to their shared ancestry, one species 
can be programmed to produce proteins characteristic of a second 
species by introducing DNA from the second species into the first.
 Mastering Biology Video: GFP Transgenic Mice
genetic code has been examined. In laboratory experiments, 
genes can be transcribed and translated after being trans-
planted from one species to another, sometimes with quite 
striking results, as shown in Figure 17.7. Bacteria can be 
programmed by the insertion of human genes to synthesize 
certain human proteins for medical use, such as insulin. Such 
applications have produced many exciting developments in 
the area of biotechnology (see Concept 19.4).
The evolutionary significance of the code’s near universal-
ity is clear. A language shared by all living things must have 
been operating very early in the history of life—early enough 
to be present in the common ancestor of all present-day 
organisms. A shared genetic vocabulary is a reminder of the 
kinship of all life.
CONCEPT CHECK 17.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS In a research article about alkap-
tonuria published in 1902, Garrod suggested that humans 
inherit two “characters” (alleles) for a particular enzyme and 
that both parents must contribute a faulty version for the 
offspring to have alkaptonuria. Today, would this disorder 
be called dominant or recessive? (See Concept 14.4.)
2. Since AUG is the start codon and codes for methionine, do 
all proteins have methionine as the first amino acid? Explain.
3. DRAW IT The template strand of a gene contains the 
sequence 3′-TTCAGTCGT-5′. Suppose that the nontemplate 
sequence was transcribed instead of the template sequence. 
Draw the nontemplate sequence in 3′ to 5′ order. Then draw 
the mRNA sequence and translate it using Figure 17.6. Predict 
how well the protein synthesized from the nontemplate 
strand would function, if at all.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 17.2
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   392 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 394 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 393
RNA Polymerase Binding and Initiation  
of Transcription
The promoter sequence of a gene includes within it the 
transcription start point—the nucleotide where RNA poly-
merase actually begins synthesizing the mRNA—and typically 
extends several dozen or so nucleotide pairs upstream from 
the start point (Figure 17.9). Based on interactions with pro-
teins (transcription factors), RNA polymerase binds in a pre-
cise location and orientation on the promoter. This binding 
determines where transcription starts and the direction it will 
travel, thus which strand of DNA is used as the template.
5¿
3¿
TATAAAA
ATATTTT
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
TATA box
DNA
Start point
Start point
Promoter
Template strand
Nontemplate strand
Transcription
factors
Transcription factors
RNA transcript
RNA polymerase II
Transcription initiation complex
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿3¿ 5¿
Several transcription 
factors, one recognizing 
the TATA box, must bind 
to the DNA before RNA 
polymerase II can bind in 
the correct position and 
orientation, as shown in 
step 3.
2
A eukaryotic promoter 
commonly includes a TATA 
box (a nucleotide sequence 
containing TATA) about 25 
nucleotides upstream from 
the transcriptional start point.
1
Additional transcription 
factors (purple) bind to
the DNA along with RNA 
polymerase II, forming the 
transcription initiation 
complex. RNA polymerase II 
then unwinds the DNA double 
helix, and RNA synthesis 
begins at the start point on 
the template strand.
3
1
2
3
2
DNA
mRNA
Pre-mRNA
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
TRANSLATION
Polypeptide
Ribosome
. Figure 17.9 The initiation of transcription at a eukaryotic 
promoter. In eukaryotic cells, proteins called transcription factors 
mediate the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II.
? Explain how the interaction of RNA polymerase with the promoter 
would differ if the figure showed transcription initiation for bacteria.
DNA
RNA polymerase
Transcription unit
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
Start point
Start point
Promoter
Unwound DNA
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
Template strand of DNA
Nontemplate strand of DNA
Completed RNA transcript
Direction of transcription (“downstream”) 
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
      Initiation. After RNA 
polymerase binds to the promoter, 
the polymerase unwinds the DNA 
strands and initiates RNA synthesis 
at the start point on the 
template strand.
1
      Elongation. The polymerase 
moves downstream, unwinding 
the DNA and elongating the RNA 
transcript 5¿ S 3¿. After transcrip-
tion has occurred, the DNA 
strands re-form a double helix.
2
      T ermination. Eventually, the 
RNA transcript is released, and 
the polymerase detaches from 
the DNA.
3
RNA
transcript
5¿
3¿5¿
Rewound
DNA
RNA
transcript
3¿
. Figure 17.8 The stages of transcription: initiation, 
elongation, and termination. This general depiction of 
transcription applies to both bacteria and eukaryotes, but the 
details of termination differ, as described in the text. Also, in a 
bacterium, the RNA transcript is immediately usable as mRNA; in a 
eukaryote, the RNA transcript must first undergo processing.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare the use of a template strand during 
transcription and replication. See Figure 16.18.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Overview of Transcription 
Animation: Overview of Transcription in Bacteria
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   393 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 395 ===

394 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Certain sections of a promoter sequence are especially 
important for binding RNA polymerase in a way that 
ensures that transcription will begin at the correct start 
point. In bacteria, part of the RNA polymerase itself specifi-
cally recognizes and binds to the promoter. In eukaryotes, 
a collection of proteins called transcription factors 
(purple proteins in Figure 17.9), help guide the binding of 
RNA polymerase and the initiation of transcription. Only 
after transcription factors are attached to the promoter 
does RNA polymerase II bind to it. The whole complex of 
transcription factors and RNA polymerase II bound to the 
promoter is called a transcription initiation complex. 
Figure 17.9 shows the role of transcription factors and a 
crucial promoter DNA sequence called the TATA box in 
forming the initiation complex at a eukaryotic promoter.
The interaction between eukaryotic RNA polymerase II 
and transcription factors is an example of the importance 
of protein-protein interactions in controlling eukaryotic 
transcription. Once the appropriate transcription factors are 
firmly attached to the promoter DNA and the polymerase is 
bound to them in the correct orientation on the DNA, the 
enzyme unwinds the two DNA strands and begins transcrib-
ing the template strand at the start point.
Elongation of the RNA Strand
As RNA polymerase moves along the DNA, it untwists the 
double helix, exposing about 10–20 DNA nucleotides at a time 
for pairing with RNA nucleotides (Figure 17.10). The enzyme 
adds nucleotides to the 3′ end of the growing RNA molecule 
as it moves along the double helix. As transcription proceeds 
forward, the newly synthesized RNA molecule behind the 
RNA polymerase peels away from its DNA template, and the 
DNA double helix re-forms. Transcription progresses at a rate 
of about 40 nucleotides per second in eukaryotes.
A single gene can be transcribed simultaneously by sev-
eral molecules of RNA polymerase following each other like 
trucks in a convoy. A growing strand of RNA trails off from 
each polymerase, with the length of each new strand reflect-
ing how far along the template the enzyme has traveled from 
the start point (see the mRNA molecules in Figure 17.23). The 
congregation of many polymerase molecules simultaneously 
transcribing a single gene increases the amount of mRNA 
transcribed from it, which helps the cell make the encoded 
protein in large amounts.
Termination of Transcription
Bacteria and eukaryotes differ in the way they terminate 
transcription. In bacteria, transcription proceeds through 
a terminator sequence in the DNA. The transcribed termi -
nator (an RNA sequence) functions as the termination sig -
nal, causing the polymerase to detach from the DNA and 
release the transcript, which requires no further modifica -
tion before translation. In eukaryotes, RNA polymerase 
Newly made
RNA
Direction of transcription
RNA
polymerase
Template
strand of DNA
3¿ end
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
A
A AU
U
CCC C
C
T T TA A
A
GG
RNA nucleotides
U
Nontemplate
strand of DNA
A
A AAT T
T
CC
T
C
G
G
. Figure 17.10 Transcription elongation. RNA polymerase 
moves along the DNA template strand, joining complementary RNA 
nucleotides to the 3′ end of the growing RNA transcript. Behind 
the polymerase, the new RNA peels away from the template strand, 
which re-forms a double helix with the nontemplate strand.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Transcription 
Animation: Elongation of the RNA Strand
II transcribes a sequence on the DNA called the polyad -
enylation signal sequence, which specifies a polyadenyl -
ation signal (AAUAAA) in the pre-mRNA. This is called a 
“signal” because once this stretch of six RNA nucleotides 
appears, it is immediately bound by certain proteins in 
the nucleus. Then, at a point about 10–35 nucleotides 
downstream from the AAUAAA, these proteins cut the 
RNA transcript free from the polymerase, releasing  
the pre-mRNA. The pre-mRNA then undergoes process -
ing, the topic of the next section. Although that cleavage 
marks the end of the mRNA, the RNA polymerase II con -
tinues to transcribe. Enzymes begin to degrade the RNA 
made after cleavage, starting at its newly exposed 5′ end. 
The polymerase continues transcribing, pursued by the 
enzymes, until they catch up to the polymerase and it  
dissociates from the DNA.
CONCEPT CHECK 17.2
1. What is a TATA box, and what is its role in transcription?
2. What enables RNA polymerase to start transcribing a gene 
at the right place on the DNA in a bacterial cell? In a eukary-
otic cell?
3. WHAT IF? Suppose X-rays caused a sequence change in the 
TATA box of a particular gene’s promoter. How would that 
affect transcription of the gene? (See Figure 17.9.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   394 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 396 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 395
nucleus. Recall that the pre-mRNA is cut and released soon 
after the polyadenylation signal, AAUAAA, is transcribed. At 
the 3′ end, an enzyme then adds 50–250 more adenine (A) 
nucleotides, forming a poly-A tail. The 5′ cap and poly-A tail 
share several important functions. First, they seem to facilitate 
the export of the mature mRNA from the nucleus. Second, 
they help protect the mRNA from degradation by hydrolytic 
enzymes. And third, they help ribosomes attach to the 5′ end 
of the mRNA once it reaches the cytoplasm. In addition to 
the cap and tail on a eukaryotic mRNA molecule, Figure 17.11 
shows the untranslated regions (UTRs) at the 5′ and 3′ ends 
of the mRNA (referred to as the 5′ UTR and 3′ UTR). The UTRs 
are parts of the mRNA that will not be translated into protein, 
but they have other functions, such as ribosome binding.
Split Genes and RNA Splicing
A remarkable stage of RNA processing in the eukaryotic 
nucleus is called RNA splicing (Figure 17.12), in which 
large portions of the RNA primary transcript molecules are 
removed and the remaining portions are reconnected. This 
Eukaryotic cells modify RNA 
after transcription
Enzymes in the eukaryotic nucleus modify pre-mRNA in 
specific ways before the genetic message is dispatched to the 
cytoplasm. During this RNA processing, both ends of the 
primary transcript are altered. Also, in most cases, certain 
interior sections of the RNA molecule are cut out and the 
remaining parts spliced together. These modifications pro-
duce an mRNA molecule ready for translation.
Alteration of mRNA Ends
Each end of a pre-mRNA molecule is modified in a particular 
way (Figure 17.11). The 3′ end, which is synthesized first, 
receives a 5′ cap, a modified form of a guanine (G) nucleotide 
added onto the 5′ end after transcription of the first 20–40 
nucleotides have been transcribed. The 3′ end of the pre-
mRNA molecule is also modified before the mRNA exits the 
CONCEPT 17.3
G
Region that includes
protein-coding segments Polyadenylation signal
5¿ Cap
3¿5¿
Start codon Stop codon
AAA...AAA
Poly-A tail5¿UTR 3¿ UTR
AAUAAAPPP
50–250 adenine nucleotides
added to the 3¿ end
A modified guanine nucleotide
added to the 5¿ endDNA
mRNA
Pre-mRNA
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
TRANSLATION
Polypeptide
Ribosome
. Figure 17.11 RNA processing: addition 
of the 5′ cap and poly-A tail. Enzymes 
modify the two ends of a eukaryotic pre-
mRNA molecule. The modified ends may 
promote the export of mRNA from the 
nucleus, and they help protect the mRNA 
from degradation. When the mRNA reaches 
the cytoplasm, the modified ends, in conjunc-
tion with certain cytoplasmic proteins, help 
with ribosome attachment. The 5′ cap and 
poly-A tail are not translated into protein, 
nor are the regions called the 5′ untranslated 
region (5′ UTR) and 3′ untranslated region 
(3′ UTR). The pink segments are introns, which 
will be described shortly (see Figure 17.12).
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  A d d i n g  t h e  5¿ Cap and Poly-A Tail
Exon
1–30 31–104 105–146
Intron Exon Intron Exon5¿ 3¿
Introns cut out and
exons spliced together
Coding
segment
Pre-mRNA
Codon numbers:
mRNA
Poly-A tail
5¿ Cap
1–146
Poly-A tail
5¿ Cap
5¿ UTR 3¿ UTR
DNA
mRNA
Pre-mRNA
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
TRANSLATION
Polypeptide
Ribosome
. Figure 17.12 RNA processing: RNA 
splicing. The RNA molecule shown here 
codes for b-globin, one of the polypeptides 
of hemoglobin. The numbers under the RNA 
refer to codons; b-globin is 146 amino acids 
long. The b-globin gene and its pre-mRNA 
transcript have three exons, corresponding 
to sequences that will exit the nucleus 
as mRNA. (The 5′ UTR and 3′ UTR do not 
code for proteins, but they are parts of 
exons because they remain in the mRNA.) 
During RNA processing, the introns are cut 
out and the exons spliced together. In many 
genes, the introns are much longer than 
the exons.
DRAW IT On the mRNA, indicate the sites of the start and stop codons.  Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: RNA Processing
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   395 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 397 ===

396 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
a component of the organism’s ribosomes. The pre-rRNA 
actually removes its own introns! The discovery of ribozymes 
invalidated the idea that all biological catalysts are proteins.
Three properties of RNA enable some RNA molecules to 
function as enzymes. First, because RNA is single-stranded, a 
region of an RNA molecule may base-pair, in an antiparallel 
arrangement, with a complementary region elsewhere in the 
same molecule; this gives the molecule a particular three-
dimensional structure. A specific structure is essential to the 
catalytic function of ribozymes, just as it is for enzymatic 
proteins. Second, like certain amino acids in an enzymatic 
protein, some of the bases in RNA contain functional groups 
that can participate in catalysis. Third, the ability of RNA to 
hydrogen-bond with other nucleic acid molecules (either RNA 
or DNA) adds specificity to its catalytic activity. For example, 
complementary base pairing between the RNA of the spli-
ceosome and the RNA of a primary RNA transcript precisely 
locates the region where the ribozyme catalyzes splicing. Later 
in this chapter, you will see how these properties of RNA also 
allow it to perform important noncatalytic roles in the cell, 
such as recognition of the three-nucleotide codons on mRNA.
The Functional and Evolutionary Importance  
of Introns
EVOLUTION Whether or not RNA splicing and the pres-
ence of introns have provided selective advantages during 
evolutionary history is a matter of some debate. In any case, 
it is informative to consider their possible adaptive benefits. 
Specific functions have not been identified for most introns, 
but at least some contain sequences that regulate gene expres-
sion, and many affect gene products.
cut-and-paste job is similar to editing a movie. The average 
length of a transcription unit along a human DNA molecule 
is about 27,000 nucleotide pairs, so the primary RNA tran-
script is also that long. However, the average-sized protein 
of 400 amino acids requires only 1,200 nucleotides in RNA 
to code for it. (Remember, each amino acid is encoded by a 
triplet of nucleotides.) This is because most eukaryotic genes 
and their RNA transcripts have long noncoding stretches 
of nucleotides, regions that are not translated. Even more 
surprising is that most of these noncoding sequences are 
interspersed between coding segments of the gene and thus 
between coding segments of the pre-mRNA. In other words, 
the sequence of DNA nucleotides that codes for a eukary-
otic polypeptide is usually not continuous; it is split into 
segments. The noncoding segments of nucleic acid that lie 
between coding regions are called intervening sequences, or 
introns. The other regions are called exons, because they are 
eventually expressed, usually by being translated into amino 
acid sequences. (Exceptions include the UTRs of the exons at 
the ends of the RNA, which make up part of the mRNA but 
are not translated into protein. Because of these exceptions, 
you may prefer to think of exons as sequences of RNA that 
exit the nucleus.) The terms intron and exon are used for both 
RNA sequences and the DNA sequences that specify them.
In making a primary transcript from a gene, RNA poly-
merase II transcribes both introns and exons from the DNA, but 
the mRNA molecule that enters the cytoplasm is an abridged 
version. In the process of RNA splicing, the introns are cut out 
from the molecule and the exons joined together, forming an 
mRNA molecule with a continuous coding sequence.
How is pre-mRNA splicing carried out? The removal of 
introns is accomplished by a large complex made of proteins 
and small RNAs called a spliceosome. This complex binds to 
several short nucleotide sequences along an intron, including 
key sequences at each end (Figure 17.13). The intron is then 
released (and rapidly degraded), and the spliceosome joins 
together the two exons that flanked the intron. The small 
RNAs in the spliceosome not only participate in spliceosome 
assembly and splice site recognition, but also catalyze the 
splicing reaction; like proteins, RNAs can act as catalysts.
Ribozymes
The idea of a catalytic role for the RNAs in the spliceosome 
arose from the discovery of ribozymes, RNA molecules that 
function as enzymes. In some organisms, RNA splicing can 
occur without proteins or even additional RNA molecules: 
The intron RNA functions as a ribozyme and catalyzes its own 
removal. For example, in the ciliate protist Tetrahymena, self-
splicing occurs in the production of ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 
Exon 1 Exon 2
mRNA
Spliceosome
components
Cut-out
intron
Small RNAsSpliceosome
Intron
Exon 1 Exon 2
Pre-mRNA
5¿
5¿
. Figure 17.13 A spliceosome splicing a pre-mRNA. The diagram 
shows a portion of a pre-mRNA transcript, with an intron (pink) 
flanked by two exons (red). Small RNAs within the spliceosome base-
pair with nucleotides at specific sites along the intron. Next, small 
spliceosome RNAs catalyze cutting of the pre-mRNA and the splicing 
together of the exons, releasing the intron for rapid degradation.
 Mastering Biology Animation: A Spliceosome
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Joan Steitz:  
Studying RNA, her “favorite molecule”
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   396 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 398 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 397
One important consequence of the presence of introns in 
genes is that a single gene can encode more than one kind 
of polypeptide. Many genes are known to give rise to two or 
more different polypeptides, depending on which segments 
are treated as exons during RNA processing; this is called 
alternative RNA splicing (see Figure 18.14). Results from 
the Human Genome Project (discussed in Concept 20.1) sug-
gest that alternative RNA splicing is one reason humans can 
get along with about the same number of genes as a nema-
tode (roundworm). Because of alternative splicing, the num-
ber of different protein products an organism produces can be 
much greater than its number of genes.
Proteins often have a modular architecture consisting of 
discrete structural and functional regions called domains. 
One domain of an enzyme, for example, might include the 
active site, while another might allow the enzyme to bind to a 
cellular membrane. In quite a few cases, different exons code 
for the different domains of a protein (Figure 17.14).
The presence of introns in a gene may facilitate the evolu-
tion of new and potentially beneficial proteins as a result of 
a process known as exon shuffling (see Figure 20.16). Introns 
increase the probability of crossing over between the exons 
of alleles of a gene—simply by providing more terrain for 
crossovers without interrupting coding sequences. This 
might result in new combinations of exons and proteins with 
altered structure and function. We can also imagine the occa-
sional mixing and matching of exons between completely 
different (nonallelic) genes. Exon shuffling of either sort 
could lead to new proteins with novel combinations of func-
tions. While most of the shuffling would result in nonbenefi-
cial changes, occasionally a beneficial variant might arise.
CONCEPT CHECK 17.3
1. Given that there are about 20,000 human protein-coding genes, 
how can human cells make 75,000–100,000 different proteins?
2. Compare RNA splicing to how you would watch a pre-
recorded television show. What would introns correspond 
to in this analogy?
3. WHAT IF? What would be the effect of treating cells with an 
agent that removed the 5′ cap from mRNAs?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 17.4
Translation is the RNA-directed 
synthesis of a polypeptide:  
A Closer Look
We will now examine how genetic information flows from 
mRNA to protein—the process of translation (Figure 17.15). 
We’ll focus on the basic steps of translation that occur in both 
bacteria and eukaryotes, while pointing out key differences.
DNA
Gene
Exon 2Exon 1 Intron Intron Exon 3
Transcription
RNA processing
Translation
Polypeptide
Domain 3
Domain 1
Domain 2
. Figure 17.14 Correspondence between exons and protein 
domains.
ACC C
C
G
UUUGG
AAA
GG C
mRNA
Amino
acids
Anticodon
tRNA
Polypeptide
Gly
Ribosome
U
tRNA with
amino acid
attached
Phe
5¿ 3¿
Codons
DNA
mRNA
Polypeptide
Ribosome
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
Trp
. Figure 17.15 Translation: the basic concept. As a molecule 
of mRNA is moved through a ribosome, codons are translated into 
amino acids, one by one. The translators, or interpreters, are tRNA 
molecules, each type with a specific anticodon at one end and a 
corresponding amino acid at the other end. A tRNA adds its amino 
acid cargo to a growing polypeptide chain when the anticodon 
hydrogen-bonds to the complementary codon on the mRNA.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Translation 
Animation: Overview of Translation
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   397 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 399 ===

398 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Molecular Components of Translation
In the process of translation, a cell “reads” a genetic message 
and builds a polypeptide accordingly. The message is a series 
of codons along an mRNA molecule, and the translator is 
called a transfer RNA (tRNA). The function of a tRNA is to 
transfer an amino acid from the cytoplasmic pool of amino 
acids to a growing polypeptide in a ribosome. A cell keeps 
its cytoplasm stocked with all 20 amino acids, either by syn-
thesizing them from other compounds or by taking them 
up from the surrounding solution. The ribosome, a structure 
made of proteins and RNAs, adds each amino acid brought to 
it by a tRNA to the growing end of a polypeptide chain (see 
Figure 17.15).
Translation is simple in principle but complex in its bio-
chemistry and mechanics, especially in the eukaryotic cell. In 
dissecting translation, we’ll focus on the slightly less compli-
cated version of the process that occurs in bacteria. We’ll first 
look at the major players in this process.
The Structure and Function of Transfer RNA
The key to translating a genetic message into a specific amino 
acid sequence is the fact that each tRNA molecule enables 
translation of a given mRNA codon into a certain amino acid. 
This is possible because a tRNA bears a specific amino acid at 
one end of its three-dimensional structure, while at the other 
end is a nucleotide triplet that can base-pair with the comple-
mentary codon on mRNA.
A tRNA molecule consists of a single RNA strand that is 
only about 80 nucleotides long (compared to hundreds of 
nucleotides for most mRNA molecules). The presence of com-
plementary stretches of nucleotide bases that can hydrogen-
bond to each other allows this single strand to fold back on 
itself and form a molecule with a particular 3-D structure. 
Flattened into one plane to clarify this base pairing, a tRNA 
molecule looks like a cloverleaf (Figure 17.16a). The tRNA 
actually twists and folds into a compact 3-D structure that is 
roughly L-shaped (Figure 17.16b), with the 5′ and 3′ ends 
of the linear tRNA both located near one end of the struc-
ture. The protruding 3′ end acts as the attachment site for an 
amino acid. The loop extending from the other end of the 
L includes the anticodon, the particular nucleotide triplet 
that base-pairs to a specific mRNA codon. Thus, the structure 
of a tRNA molecule fits its function.
Anticodons are conventionally written 3′ S 5′ to align 
properly with codons written 5′ S 3′ (see Figure 17.15). (For 
base pairing, RNA strands must be antiparallel, like DNA.) As 
an example of how tRNAs work, consider the mRNA codon 
5′@GGC@3′, which is translated as the amino acid glycine. 
The tRNA that base-pairs with this codon by hydrogen bond-
ing has 3′@CCG@5′ as its anticodon and carries glycine at its 
other end (see the incoming tRNA approaching the ribosome 
in Figure 17.15). As an mRNA molecule is moved through 
Anticodon
G
C
G
G
A
U
U
C
G
C
U
U
A
A
A
GACAC
CU
G
C GUGU
CU
GAG
G
U
C
C
A
G
A
A
AG
U
C
A
CGA
CUA
G
AGG
G
GA
C
U
Anticodon
(a)
Amino acid
attachment site
Hydrogen
bonds
5¿
3¿
3¿ 5¿
Amino acid
attachment site
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
GAA
3¿
5¿
Anticodon
Hydrogen 
bonds
Two-dimensional structure. The four base-paired regions and 
three loops are characteristic of all tRNAs, as is the base sequence 
of the amino acid attachment site at the 3¿ end. The anticodon 
triplet is unique to each tRNA type, as are some sequences in the 
other two loops. (The asterisks mark bases that have been 
chemically modified, a characteristic of tRNA. The modified bases 
contribute to tRNA function in a way that is not yet understood.)
(b)Three-dimensional structure
(c)Symbol used 
in this book
A
C
C
. Figure 17.16 The structure of transfer RNA (tRNA).
VISUAL SKILLS Look at the tRNA shown in this figure. Based on its 
anticodon, identify the codon it would bind to, as well as the amino acid 
that it would carry.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: RNA Folding 
a ribosome, glycine will be added to the polypeptide chain 
whenever the codon 5′@GGC@3′ is presented for translation. 
Codon by codon, the genetic message is translated as tRNAs 
position each amino acid in the order prescribed, and the 
ribosome adds that amino acid onto the growing polypeptide 
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   398 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 400 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 399
The Structure and Function of Ribosomes
Although the ribosomes of bacteria and eukaryotes are very 
similar in structure and function, eukaryotic ribosomes 
are slightly larger and differ somewhat from bacterial ribo-
somes in their molecular composition. The differences 
are medically significant. Certain antibiotic drugs can 
inactivate bacterial ribosomes without affecting the abil-
ity of eukaryotic ribosomes to make proteins. These drugs, 
including tetracycline and streptomycin, are used to combat 
bacterial infections. 
Ribosomes facilitate the specific coupling of tRNA antico-
dons with mRNA codons during protein synthesis. A ribosome 
consists of a large subunit and a small subunit, each made up 
of proteins and one or more ribosomal RNAs, or rRNAs 
(Figure 17.18). In eukaryotes, the subunits are made in the 
nucleolus. Ribosomal RNA genes are transcribed, and the RNA 
is processed and assembled with proteins imported from the 
chain. The tRNA molecule is a translator in the sense that, in 
the context of the ribosome, it can read a nucleic acid word 
(the mRNA codon) and interpret it as a protein word (the 
amino acid).
Like mRNA and other types of cellular RNA, transfer 
RNA molecules are transcribed from DNA templates. In a 
eukaryotic cell, tRNA, like mRNA, is made in the nucleus 
and then travels to the cytoplasm, where it will participate 
in the process of translation. In both bacterial and eukary-
otic cells, each tRNA molecule is used repeatedly, picking 
up its designated amino acid in the cytosol, depositing this 
cargo onto a polypeptide chain at the ribosome, and then 
leaving the ribosome, ready to pick up another of the same 
amino acid.
The accurate translation of a genetic message requires 
two instances of molecular recognition. First, a tRNA that 
binds to an mRNA codon specifying a particular amino acid 
must carry that amino acid, and no other, to the ribosome. 
The correct matching up of tRNA and amino acid is carried 
out by a family of related enzymes that are aptly named 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (Figure 17.17). The active 
site of each type of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase fits only a 
specific combination of amino acid and tRNA. (Regions of 
both the amino acid attachment end and the anticodon end 
of the tRNA ensure the specific fit.) There are 20 different 
synthetases, one for each amino acid. A synthetase joins a 
given amino acid to an appropriate tRNA; one synthetase 
is able to bind to all the different tRNAs for its particular 
amino acid. The synthetase catalyzes the covalent attach-
ment of the amino acid to its tRNA in a process driven by the 
hydrolysis of ATP. The resulting aminoacyl tRNA, also called 
a charged tRNA, is released from the enzyme and is then 
available to deliver its amino acid to a growing polypeptide 
chain on a ribosome.
The second instance of molecular recognition is the 
pairing of the tRNA anticodon with the appropriate mRNA 
codon. If one tRNA type existed for each mRNA codon 
specifying an amino acid, there would be 61 tRNAs (see 
Figure 17.6). In bacteria, however, there are only about 45 
tRNAs, signifying that some tRNAs must be able to bind to 
more than one codon. This is possible because the rules for 
base pairing between the third nucleotide base of a codon 
and the corresponding base of a tRNA anticodon are relaxed 
compared to those at other codon positions. For example, 
the nucleotide base U at the 5′ end of a tRNA anticodon can 
pair with either A or G in the third position (at the 3′ end) 
of an mRNA codon. The flexible base pairing at this codon 
position is called wobble. Wobble explains why the syn-
onymous codons for a given amino acid most often differ 
in their third nucleotide base. Accordingly, a tRNA with the 
anticodon 3′@UCU@5′ can base-pair with either the mRNA 
codon 5′@AGA@3′ or 5′@AGG@3′, both of which code for argi-
nine (see Figure 17.6).
Pi
AAU
Tyrosyl-tRNA 
synthetase (enzyme), 
which can only bind 
tyrosine and Tyr-tRNA
Tyrosine (Tyr) 
(amino acid)
Anticodon on tRNA
complementary to the
Tyr codon on mRNA
Tyr-tRNA
ATP
AMP + 2
     The amino acid
and the appropriate
tRNA enter the active
site of tJe speciƂc
synthetase.
1
     Using ATP, 
the synthetase
catalyzes the
covalent bonding
of the amino acid 
to its speciƂc t40#
2
     The tRNA,
charged with
its amino acid,
is released by
the synthetase.
3
tRNA
Computer model
Aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase
Amino
acid
. Figure 17.17 Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases provide 
specificity in joining amino acids to their tRNAs. Linkage of a 
tRNA to its amino acid is an endergonic process that occurs at the 
expense of ATP, which loses two phosphate groups, becoming AMP.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Transfer RNA
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   399 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 401 ===

400 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
cytoplasm. Completed ribosomal subunits are then exported 
via nuclear pores to the cytoplasm. In both bacteria and 
eukaryotes, a large and a small subunit join to form a func-
tional ribosome only when attached to an mRNA molecule. 
About one-third of the mass of a ribosome is made up of pro-
teins; the rest consists of three rRNA molecules (in bacteria) or 
four (in eukaryotes). Because most cells contain thousands of 
ribosomes, rRNA is the most abundant type of cellular RNA.
The structure of a ribosome reflects its function of bringing 
an mRNA molecule together with tRNAs carrying amino acids. 
The mRNA itself has a binding site for the ribosome. (In the 
Scientific Skills Exercise, you can work with DNA sequences 
representing this binding site in a group of Escherichia coli 
genes.) The ribosome, in turn, has a binding site for mRNA, 
as well as three binding sites for tRNA (see Figure 17.18). The 
P site (peptidyl-tRNA binding site) holds the tRNA carrying 
the growing polypeptide chain, while the A site (aminoacyl-
tRNA binding site) holds the tRNA carrying the next amino 
acid to be added to the chain. Discharged tRNAs leave the ribo-
some from the E site (exit site). The ribosome holds the tRNA 
and mRNA in close proximity and positions the new amino 
acid so that it can be added to the carboxyl end of the growing 
polypeptide. It then catalyzes the formation of the peptide 
bond. As the polypeptide becomes longer, it passes through an 
exit tunnel in the ribosome’s large subunit. When the polypep-
tide is complete, it is released through the exit tunnel.
The widely accepted model is that rRNAs, rather than 
ribosomal proteins, are primarily responsible for both the 
structure and the function of the ribosome. The proteins, 
which are largely on the exterior, support the shape changes 
of the rRNA molecules as they carry out catalysis during trans-
lation. Ribosomal RNA is the main constituent of the A and 
P sites and of the interface between the two subunits; it also 
acts as the catalyst of peptide bond formation. Thus, a ribo-
some could actually be considered one colossal ribozyme!
Building a Polypeptide
We can divide translation, the synthesis of a polypeptide, into 
three stages: initiation, elongation, and termination. All three 
require protein “factors” that aid in the translation process. 
Some steps of initiation and elongation also require energy, 
provided by the hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP).
Ribosome Association and Initiation of Translation
The initiation stage of translation brings together an mRNA, a 
tRNA bearing the first amino acid of the polypeptide, and the 
two subunits of a ribosome. First, a small ribosomal subunit 
binds to both the mRNA and a specific initiator tRNA, which 
carries the amino acid methionine. In bacteria, the small subunit 
can bind the two in either order; it binds the mRNA at a specific 
RNA sequence, just upstream of the AUG start codon. In eukary-
otes, the small subunit, with the initiator tRNA already bound, 
binds to the 5′ cap of the mRNA and then moves, or scans, 
5¿ 3¿
tRNA
molecules
Growing
polypeptide Exit tunnel
for growing
polypeptide
Large
subunit
Small
subunit
mRNA
(a)Computer model of functioning ribosome. This is a model of 
a bacterial ribosome, showing its overall shape. The eukaryotic 
ribosome is roughly similar. A ribosomal subunit is a complex
of ribosomal RNA molecules and proteins.
Small
subunit
Large
subunit
A site (aminoacyl-
tRNA binding site)
P site (peptidyl-tRNA
binding site)
Exit tunnel
mRNA
binding site
PA
E site 
(exit site)
(b)Schematic model showing binding sites. A ribosome has an 
mRNA binding site and three tRNA binding sites, known as the 
A, P , and E sites. This schematic ribosome will appear in later 
diagrams.
tRNA
Next amino acid
to be added to
polypeptide chain
Anticodon base-
pairing with
codon in A site
Carboxyl 
end
Growing polypeptideAmino end
5¿
3¿mRNA
Codons
(c)Schematic model with mRNA and tRNA. A tRNA fits into 
the A site when its anticodon base-pairs with an mRNA codon. 
The P site holds the tRNA attached to the growing polypeptide. 
The A site holds the tRNA carrying the next amino acid to be added 
to the polypeptide chain. Discharged tRNAs leave from the 
E site. The polypeptide grows at its carboxyl end.
E
E
EPA
DNA
mRNA
Polypeptide
Ribosome
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
. Figure 17.18 The anatomy of a functioning ribosome.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Ribosomes
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   400 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 402 ===

How Can a Sequence Logo Be Used to Identify Ribosome 
Binding Sites on Bacterial mRNAs? When initiating translation, 
ribosomes bind to an mRNA at a ribosome binding site upstream 
of the AUG start codon. Because mRNAs from different genes all 
bind to a ribosome, the genes encoding these mRNAs are likely to 
have a similar base sequence where the ribosomes bind. Therefore, 
candidate ribosome binding sites on mRNA can be identified by 
comparing DNA sequences (and thus the mRNA sequences) of 
multiple genes in a species, searching the region upstream of the 
start codon for shared (conserved) stretches of bases. In this exer-
cise, you will analyze DNA sequences from multiple such genes, 
represented by a visual graphic called a sequence logo.
How the Experiment Was Done The DNA sequences of 149 
genes from the E. coli genome were aligned using computer 
software. The aim was to identify similar base sequences—at 
the appropriate location in each gene—as potential ribosome 
binding sites. Rather than presenting the data as a series of 149 
sequences aligned in a column (a sequence alignment), the re-
searchers used a sequence logo.
Data from the Experiment To show how sequence logos are 
made, the potential ribosome binding regions from ten E. coli genes 
are shown below in a sequence alignment, followed by the sequence 
logo derived from the aligned sequences. Note that the DNA shown 
is the nontemplate (coding) strand, which is how DNA sequences are 
typically presented. (All data from Thomas D. Schneider.)
–18
–17
–16
–15
–14
–13
–12
–11
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
GGTAACGAGGTAACAACCATGCGAGTG
CATAACGGAGTGATCGCATTGAACATG
CGCGTAAGGAAA TCCATTATGTACTAT
TTCACACAGGAAA CAGCTATGACCATG
CAATTCAGGG TGGTGAATGTGAAA CCA
GGCATGACAGGAGTAAAAA TGGCTATC
ACCC ACTAAGGTATTTT CATGGCGACC
AAGAGGATTAAGTATCTCATGGCTGAA
ATACACCC AGGGGG CGGAATGAAA GCG
TAACAATGGCGACATATTATGGCCC AA
thrA
lacA
lacY
lacZ
lacI
recA
galR
met J
lexA
trpR
3¿5¿
m Sequence alignment
GACT
GGA
AT
GACT G GG
A
AA AA
A
C
CCT
TT
GG
AA
CCT
GAC
–18
–17
–16
–15
–14
–13
–12
–11
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
GTG
3¿5¿
Interpreting a Sequence Logo INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. In the sequence logo, the 
horizontal axis shows the pri-
mary sequence of the DNA by 
nucleotide position. Letters 
for each base are stacked on top of each other according to their 
relative frequency at that position among the aligned sequences, 
with the most common base as the largest letter at the top of the 
stack. The height of each letter represents the relative frequency 
of that base at that position. (a) In the sequence alignment, count 
the number of each base at position –9 and order them from 
most to least frequent. Compare this to the size and placement of 
each base at –9 in the logo. (b) Do the same for positions 0 and 1.
2. The height of a stack of letters in a logo indicates the predic-
tive power of that stack (determined statistically). If the stack 
is tall, we can be more confident in predicting what base will 
be in that position if a new sequence is added to the logo. For 
example, at position 2 in the sequence alignment, all ten se-
quences have a G; the probability of finding a G there in a new 
sequence is very high, as is the stack in the sequence logo. For 
short stacks, the bases all have about the same frequency, so 
it’s hard to predict a base at those positions. (a) Looking at the 
sequence logo, which two positions have the most predictable 
bases? What bases do you predict would be at those positions 
in a newly sequenced gene? (b) Which 12 positions have the 
least predictable bases? How do you know? How does this 
reflect the relative frequencies of the bases shown at these 
positions in the sequence alignment? Use the two leftmost 
positions of the 12 as examples in your answer.
3. In the actual experiment, the researchers used 149 sequences to build 
their sequence logo, which is shown below. There is a stack at each 
position, even if short, because the sequence logo includes more 
data. (a) Which three positions in this sequence logo have the most 
predictable bases? Name the most frequent base at each. (b) Which 
four positions have the least predictable bases? How can you tell?
Scientific Skills Exercise
 Ribosome binding site on mRNA
3¿5¿
. Sequence logo
Further Reading T. D. Schneider and R. M. Stephens, Sequence logos: A new way 
to display consensus sequences, Nucleic Acids Research 18:6097–6100 (1990).
GACT
GGAA
CC
T
GGG
AAA
CCC
T
GACTT
T
GGG
G GGG
G
GG
AAAACT
A AA AAAC
C
CCC
CCGCT
T
TT
T
TT
T
G
A
C
TTTG
A
C
TTGG
AA
C
CTT
GG
ACT
GG
A
CC
TT AC
T
–18
–17
–16
–15
–14
–13
–12
–11
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
83¿5¿
4. A consensus sequence identifies the base occurring most often at 
each position in the set of sequences. (a) Write out the consensus 
sequence of this (the nontemplate) strand. In any position where 
the base can’t be determined, put a dash. (b) Which provides 
more information—the consensus sequence or the sequence 
logo? What is lost in the less informative method?
5.  (a) Based on the logo, what five adjacent base positions in the 5′ 
UTR region are most likely to be involved in ribosome binding? 
Explain. (b) What is represented by the bases in positions 0–2?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   401 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 403 ===

402 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(all written 5′ S 3′) do not code for amino acids but instead 
act as signals to stop translation. A release factor, a protein 
shaped like an aminoacyl tRNA, binds directly to the stop 
codon in the A site. The release factor causes the addition of 
a water molecule instead of an amino acid to the polypeptide 
chain. (Water molecules are abundant in the cytosol.) This 
reaction hydrolyzes (breaks) the bond between the completed 
polypeptide and the tRNA in the P site, releasing the polypep-
tide through the exit tunnel of the ribosome’s large subunit. 
The remainder of the translation assembly then comes 
apart in a multistep process, aided by other protein factors. 
Breakdown of the translation assembly requires the hydroly-
sis of two more GTP molecules.
Completing and Targeting the Functional 
Protein
The process of translation is often not sufficient to make a 
functional protein. In this section, you will learn about modi-
fications that polypeptide chains undergo after the transla-
tion process as well as some of the mechanisms used to target 
completed proteins to specific sites in the cell.
Protein Folding and Post-translational Modifications
During its synthesis, a polypeptide chain begins to coil 
and fold spontaneously as a consequence of its amino acid 
sequence (primary structure), forming a protein with a spe-
cific shape: a three-dimensional molecule with secondary and 
tertiary structure (see Figure 5.18). Thus, a gene determines 
primary structure, which in turn determines shape.
downstream along the mRNA until it 
reaches the AUG start codon, where the 
initiator tRNA then hydrogen-bonds, as 
shown in step 1 of Figure 17.19. In either 
bacteria or eukaryotes, the AUG signals 
the start of translation; this is important 
because it establishes the codon reading 
frame for the mRNA.
The union of mRNA, initiator 
tRNA, and the small ribosomal sub-
unit is followed by the attachment of 
a large ribosomal subunit, completing 
the translation initiation complex (see 
Figure 17.19). Proteins called initiation 
factors are required to bring all these 
components together. The cell also 
expends energy obtained by hydrolysis 
of a GTP molecule to form the initia-
tion complex. At the completion of the 
initiation process, the initiator tRNA 
sits in the P site of the ribosome, and 
the vacant A site is ready for the next 
aminoacyl tRNA. Note that a polypep-
tide is always synthesized in one direction, from the initial 
methionine at the amino end, also called the N-terminus, 
toward the final amino acid at the carboxyl end, also called 
the C-terminus (see Figure 5.15).
Elongation of the Polypeptide Chain
In the elongation stage of translation, amino acids are added 
one by one to the previous amino acid at the C-terminus 
of the growing chain. Each addition involves several pro-
teins called elongation factors and occurs in a three-step cycle 
described in Figure 17.20. Energy expenditure occurs in the 
first and third steps. Codon recognition requires hydrolysis of 
one molecule of GTP, which increases the accuracy and effi-
ciency of this step. One more GTP is hydrolyzed (broken up) 
to provide energy for the translocation step.
The mRNA is moved through the ribosome in one direc-
tion only, 5′ end first; this is equivalent to the ribosome 
moving 5′ S 3′ on the mRNA. The main point is that the 
ribosome and the mRNA move relative to each other, uni-
directionally, codon by codon. The elongation cycle takes 
less than a tenth of a second in bacteria and is repeated as 
each amino acid is added until the polypeptide is completed. 
The empty tRNAs that are released from the E site return to 
the cytoplasm, where they will be reloaded with the appropri-
ate amino acid (see Figure 17.17).
Termination of Translation
The final stage of translation is termination (Figure 17.21). 
Elongation continues until a stop codon in the mRNA reaches 
the A site. The nucleotide base triplets UAG, UAA, and UGA  
mRNA
mRNA binding site Translation initiation complex
Small
ribosomal
subunit
Large
ribosomal
subunit
Start codon
Initiator tRNA
GTP GDP
+
3¿5¿
A small ribosomal subunit binds to an 
mRNA. In a bacterial cell, the mRNA 
binding site on this subunit recognizes a 
specific nucleotide sequence on the mRNA 
just upstream of the start codon (see the 
Scientific Skills Exercise). An initiator tRNA, 
with the anticodon UAC, base-pairs with 
the start codon, AUG. This tRNA carries the 
amino acid methionine (Met). 
1 The arrival of a large ribosomal subunit 
completes the initiation complex. 
Proteins called initiation factors (not 
shown) are required to bring all the 
translation components together. 
Hydrolysis of GTP provides the energy 
for the assembly. The initiator tRNA is in 
the P site; the A site is available to the 
tRNA bearing the next amino acid.
2
P siteMet
AE
3¿5¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
UAC
AUG
Pi
Met
Ribosome binding
site
. Figure 17.19 The initiation of translation.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Initiation of Translation
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   402 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 404 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 403
3¿
Release 
factor Free
polypeptide
5¿
3¿
5¿
2 GDP + 2
3¿
5¿
Stop codon
(UAG, UAA, or UGA)
When a ribosome reaches a stop codon on 
mRNA, the A site of the ribosome accepts a 
”release factor”—a protein shaped like a 
tRNA—instead of an aminoacyl tRNA.
1 The release factor promotes hydrolysis of the 
bond between the tRNA in the P site and the 
last amino acid of the polypeptide, thus 
freeing the polypeptide from the ribosome.
2 The two ribosomal subunits and the 
other components of the assembly 
dissociate with the hydrolysis of two 
GTP molecules.
3
GTP2
Pi
. Figure 17.21 The termination of translation. Like elongation, termination requires GTP 
hydrolysis as well as additional protein factors, which are not shown here.
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
Termination of Translation
PA
E
Ribosome ready for
next aminoacyl tRNA
GDP +
GTP
1
mRNA
3¿
5¿
Amino end
of polypeptide
Carboxyl end of 
polypeptide      Codon recognition. The anticodon of 
an incoming aminoacyl tRNA base-pairs 
with the complementary mRNA codon in 
the A site. Hydrolysis of GTP increases 
the accuracy and efficiency of this step. 
Although not shown, many different 
aminoacyl tRNAs are present, but only 
the one with the appropriate anticodon 
will bind and allow the cycle to progress.
2     Peptide bond formation.
An rRNA molecule of the large 
ribosomal subunit catalyzes the 
formation of a peptide bond 
between the carboxyl end of the 
growing polypeptide in the P site 
and the amino group of the new 
amino acid in the A site. As shown 
in the next diagram, this step 
removes the polypeptide from the 
tRNA in the P site and attaches it 
to the amino acid on the tRNA in 
the A site.
3     Translocation. The 
ribosome translocates the 
tRNA in the A site to the 
P site. At the same time, 
the empty tRNA in the P 
site is moved to the E site, 
where it is released. The 
mRNA moves along with its 
bound tRNAs, bringing the 
next codon to be translated 
into the A site.
GTP
Pi
GDP +Pi
DNA
mRNA
Polypeptide
Ribosome
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
P
site
A
site
E
PA
E
PA
E
. Figure 17.20 The elongation cycle of translation. The hydrolysis of GTP plays an important 
role in the elongation process; elongation factors are not shown.
 Mastering Biology Animation: 
Elongation Cycle of Translation
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   403 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 405 ===

404 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
What determines whether a ribosome is free in the cytosol 
or bound to rough ER? Polypeptide synthesis always begins in 
the cytosol as a free ribosome starts to translate an mRNA mol-
ecule. There, the process continues to completion—unless the 
growing polypeptide itself cues the ribosome to attach to the 
ER. The polypeptides of proteins destined for the endomem-
brane system or for secretion are marked by a signal peptide, 
which targets the protein to the ER (Figure 17.22). The signal 
peptide, a sequence of about 20 amino acids at or near the 
leading end (N-terminus) of the polypeptide, is recognized as it 
emerges from the ribosome by a protein-RNA complex called a 
signal-recognition particle (SRP). This particle escorts the 
ribosome to a receptor protein built into the ER membrane. 
The receptor is part of a multiprotein translocation complex. 
Polypeptide synthesis continues there, and the growing poly-
peptide snakes across the membrane into the ER lumen via a 
protein pore. The signal peptide is removed by an enzyme. The 
rest of the completed polypeptide, if it is to be secreted from 
the cell, is released into solution within the ER lumen (see 
Figure 17.22). Or, if the polypeptide is to be a membrane pro-
tein, amino acid sequences further in the chain cause that part 
to remain embedded in the ER membrane. In either case, it 
travels in a transport vesicle to its destination (see Figure 8.9).
Other kinds of signal peptides are used to target polypep-
tides to mitochondria, chloroplasts, the interior of the nucleus, 
and other organelles that are not part of the endomembrane 
system. The critical difference in these cases is that translation 
Additional steps—post-translational modifications—may 
be required before the protein can begin doing its particular 
job in the cell. Certain amino acids may be chemically modi-
fied by the attachment of sugars, lipids, phosphate groups, 
or other additions. Enzymes may remove one or more amino 
acids from the leading (amino) end of the polypeptide chain. 
In some cases, a polypeptide chain may be enzymatically 
cleaved into two or more pieces. In other cases, two or more 
polypeptides that are synthesized separately may come 
together, if the protein has quaternary structure; an example 
is hemoglobin (see Figure 5.18).
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Protein Processing
Targeting Polypeptides to Specific Locations
In electron micrographs of eukaryotic cells active in protein 
synthesis, two populations of ribosomes are evident: free 
and bound (see Figure 7.10). Free ribosomes are suspended 
in the cytosol and mostly synthesize proteins that stay in the 
cytosol and function there. In contrast, bound ribosomes are 
attached to the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) or to the nuclear envelope. Bound ribosomes make pro-
teins of the endomembrane system (see Figure 7.15) as well as 
proteins secreted from the cell, such as insulin. It is important 
to note that the ribosomes themselves are identical and can 
alternate between being free ribosomes one time they are 
used and being bound ribosomes the next.
Ribosome
Signal-
recognition
particle
(SRP)
SRP
receptor
proteinCYTOSOL
ER LUMEN
ER
membrane
Protein
Signal
peptide
removed
Translocation
complex
     Polypeptide
synthesis begins
on a free
ribosome in
the cytosol.
1      An SRP binds to
the signal peptide,
(if present), halting
synthesis momentarily.
2      The signal
peptide is cleaved
by an enzyme in
the receptor
protein complex.
5      The rest of
the completed
polypeptide leaves 
the ribosome and
folds into its final
conformation.
6     The SRP binds to a receptor 
protein in the ER membrane, 
part of a protein complex that 
forms a pore.
3      The SRP leaves, and
polypeptide synthesis
resumes, with simultane-
ous translocation across
the membrane.
4
mRNA
Signal
peptide
. Figure 17.22 The signal mechanism for targeting proteins to the ER.
MAKE CONNECTIONS If this protein were destined for secretion, what 
would happen to it after its synthesis was completed? See Figure 8.9.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Cotranslational Translocation
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   404 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 406 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 405
is completed in the cytosol before the polypeptide is imported 
into the organelle. Translocation mechanisms also vary, but 
in all cases studied to date, the “postal zip codes” that address 
proteins for secretion or to cellular locations are signal peptides 
of some sort. Bacteria also employ signal peptides to target pro-
teins to the plasma membrane or for secretion.
Making Multiple Polypeptides in Bacteria 
and Eukaryotes
In previous sections, you learned how a single polypeptide 
is synthesized using the information encoded in an mRNA 
molecule. When a polypeptide is required in a cell, though, 
the need is for many copies, not just one.
In both bacteria and eukaryotes, multiple ribosomes trans-
late an mRNA at the same time (Figure 17.23); that is, a single 
mRNA is used to make many copies of a polypeptide simultane-
ously. Once a ribosome is far enough past the start codon, a sec-
ond ribosome can attach to the mRNA, eventually resulting in 
a number of ribosomes trailing along the mRNA. Such strings of 
ribosomes, called polyribosomes (or polysomes), can be seen 
with an electron microscope; they can be either free or bound. 
They enable a cell to rapidly make many copies of a polypeptide.
Another way both bacteria and eukaryotes increase the 
number of copies of a polypeptide is by transcribing multiple 
mRNAs from the same gene. However, the coordination of the 
two processes—transcription and translation—differs in the 
two groups. The most important differences between bacteria 
Direction of
transcription
mRNA
DNA
RNA polymerase
Polyribosome
RNA
polymerase
Polyribosome
DNA
mRNA (5¿ end)
Ribosome
Polypeptide
(amino end)
0.25 om
. Figure 17.24 Coupled transcription and translation in 
bacteria. In bacterial cells, the translation of mRNA can begin as soon 
as the leading (5′) end of the mRNA molecule peels away from the 
DNA template. The micrograph (TEM) shows a strand of E. coli DNA 
being transcribed by RNA polymerase molecules. Attached to each RNA 
polymerase molecule is a growing strand of mRNA, which is already 
being translated by ribosomes. The newly synthesized polypeptides are 
not visible in the micrograph but are shown in the diagram.
VISUAL SKILLS Which one of the mRNA molecules started being transcribed 
first? On that mRNA, which ribosome started translating the mRNA first?
Start of 
mRNA
(5¿ end)
Incoming
ribosomal
subunits
Growing
polypeptides Completed
polypeptide
End of 
mRNA
(3¿ end)
(a)
0.1 om0.1 om
mRNA
Ribosomes
An mRNA molecule is generally translated simultaneously 
by several ribosomes in clusters called polyribosomes.
(b)This micrograph shows a large polyribosome in a bacterial cell. 
Growing polypeptides are not visible here (TEM).
Polyribosome
. Figure 17.23 Polyribosomes.
and eukaryotes arise from the bacterial cell’s lack of compart-
mental organization. Like a one-room workshop, a bacterial 
cell ensures a streamlined operation by coupling the two 
processes. With no nuclear envelope, it can simultaneously 
transcribe and translate the same gene (Figure 17.24), and the 
newly made protein can quickly diffuse to its site of function.
In contrast, the eukaryotic cell’s nuclear envelope segre-
gates transcription from translation and provides a compart-
ment for extensive RNA processing. This processing stage 
includes additional steps, discussed earlier, the regulation 
of which can help coordinate the eukaryotic cell’s elaborate 
activities. Figure 17.25 summarizes the path from gene to 
polypeptide in a eukaryotic cell.
CONCEPT CHECK 17.4
1. What two processes ensure that the correct amino acid is 
added to a growing polypeptide chain?
2. Discuss the different post-translational changes that may be 
needed to make a functional protein. 
3. DRAW IT Draw a tRNA with the anticodon 3′@CGU@5′. Given 
wobble, what two different codons could it bind to? Draw 
each codon on an mRNA, labeling all 5′ and 3′ ends, the 
tRNA, and the amino acid it carries.
4. WHAT IF? In eukaryotic cells, mRNAs have been found 
to have a circular arrangement in which proteins hold 
the poly-A tail near the 5′ cap. How might this increase 
translation efficiency?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   405 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 407 ===

406 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
ACC
A
U
C
AMINO ACID ACTIVATION
TRANSLATION
RNA PROCESSING
TRANSCRIPTION
DNA
RNA
polymerase II
Exon
RNA
transcript
NUCLEUS
CYTOPLASM
Ribosomal
subunits
Growing
polypeptide
RNA transcript
(pre-mRNA)
Intron
mRNA
5¿ Cap
5¿ Cap
tRNA
Amino
acid
Aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase
Codon
Anticodon
Ribosome
5¿
3¿
AE
P
A
E
      RNA is transcribed 
from a DNA template.
      In eukaryotes, the 
RNA transcript (pre-
mRNA) is spliced and 
modified to produce 
mRNA, which moves 
from the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm.
      The mRNA leaves 
the nucleus and 
attaches to a ribosome.
      Each amino acid 
attaches to its proper tRNA 
with the help of a specific 
enzyme and ATP .
Aminoacyl
(charged)
tRNA
      A succession of tRNAs 
add their amino acids to 
the polypeptide chain 
as the mRNA is moved 
through the ribosome
one codon at a time. 
When completed, the 
polypeptide is released 
from the ribosome.
Poly-A
Poly-A
UUU UGG AGU
Poly-A
3¿
1
2
3
4
5
AAA
. Figure 17.25 A summary of transcription and translation 
in a eukaryotic cell. This diagram shows the path from one gene 
to one polypeptide. Each gene in the DNA can be transcribed 
repeatedly into many identical RNA molecules, and each mRNA 
can be translated repeatedly to yield many identical polypeptide 
molecules. (Remember that the final products of some genes are 
not polypeptides but RNA molecules that don’t get translated, 
including tRNAs and rRNAs.) In general, the steps of transcription 
and translation are similar in bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic 
cells. The major difference is the occurrence of RNA processing in 
the eukaryotic nucleus. Other significant differences are found in 
the initiation stages of both transcription and translation and in the 
termination of transcription. To visualize these processes in their 
cellular context, see Figure 7.32d-f.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Protein Synthesis
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   406 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 408 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 407
and Figure 23.18). Another disorder caused by a point muta-
tion is a heart condition called familial cardiomyopathy, 
which is responsible for some of the tragic incidents of sud-
den death in young athletes. Point mutations in several genes 
encoding muscle proteins have been identified, any of which 
can lead to this disorder.
Types of Small-Scale Mutations
Many mutations occur in regions outside of protein-coding 
genes, and any potential effect they have on the phenotype of 
the organism may be subtle and hard to detect. For this reason, 
here we’ll concentrate on mutations within protein-coding 
genes. Small-scale mutations within a gene can be divided into 
two general categories: (1) single nucleotide-pair substitutions 
and (2) nucleotide-pair insertions or deletions. Insertions and 
deletions can involve one or more nucleotide pairs.
Substitutions
A nucleotide-pair substitution is the replacement of one 
nucleotide and its partner with another pair of nucleotides 
(Figure 17.27a). Some substitutions have no effect on the 
encoded protein, owing to the redundancy of the genetic 
code. For example, if 3′@CCG@5′ on the template strand 
mutated to 3′@CCA@5′, the mRNA codon that used to be GGC 
would become GGU, but a glycine would still be inserted at 
the proper location in the protein (see Figure 17.6). In other 
words, a change in a nucleotide pair may transform one 
codon into another that is translated into the same amino 
acid. Such a change is an example of a silent mutation, 
which has no observable effect on the 
phenotype. (Silent mutations can occur 
outside genes as well.) Interestingly, 
there is evidence that some silent muta-
tions may indirectly affect where or at 
what level the gene gets expressed, even 
though the actual protein is the same.
Substitutions that change one 
amino acid to another one are called 
missense mutations. Such a muta-
tion may have little effect on the 
protein: The new amino acid may 
have properties similar to those of the 
amino acid it replaces, or it may be in 
a region of the protein where the exact 
sequence of amino acids is not essen-
tial to the protein’s function.
However, the nucleotide-pair sub-
stitutions of greatest interest are those 
that cause a major change in a protein. 
The alteration of a single amino acid 
in a crucial area of a protein—such as 
in the part of the b-globin subunit of 
Mutations of one or a few 
nucleotides can affect protein 
structure and function
Now that you have explored the process of gene expression, 
you can consider the effects of changes to the genetic informa-
tion of a cell. Because these changes, called mutations, are the 
ultimate source of new genes, they are responsible for the huge 
diversity of genes found among organisms. Earlier, we consid-
ered chromosomal rearrangements that affect long segments of 
DNA (see Figure 15.14); these are considered large-scale muta-
tions. Here we examine small-scale mutations of one or a few 
nucleotide pairs, including point mutations, changes in a 
single nucleotide pair of a gene.
If a point mutation occurs in a gamete or in a cell that 
gives rise to gametes, it may be transmitted to offspring and 
to future generations. If the mutation has an adverse effect on 
the phenotype of a person, the mutant condition is referred 
to as a genetic disorder or hereditary disease. For example, 
we can trace the genetic basis of sickle-cell disease to the 
mutation of a single nucleotide pair in the gene that encodes 
the b-globin polypeptide of hemoglobin. The change of a 
single nucleotide in the DNA’s template strand leads to an 
altered mRNA and the production of an abnormal protein 
(Figure 17.26; also see Figure 5.19). In individuals who are 
homozygous for the mutant allele, the sickling of red blood 
cells caused by the altered hemoglobin produces the multiple 
symptoms associated with sickle-cell disease (see Concept 14.4  
CONCEPT 17.5
A
Val
AGG UGG
Glu
CTC
Wild-type d-globin DNA
mRNA mRNA
3¿ 3¿5¿ 5¿
5¿ 5¿3¿ 3¿
Normal hemoglobin
CC
TGAG5¿ 5¿3¿ 3¿GG
Mutant d-globin DNA
Sickle-cell hemoglobin The mutant 
d-globin has a valine 
(Val) instead of a 
glutamic acid (Glu).
The mutant mRNA
has a U instead of 
an A in one codon.
In the DNA, the
mutant (sickle-cell) 
template strand
(top) has an A 
where the wild-
type template 
has a T.
Wild-type d-globin Sickle-cell d-globin
. Figure 17.26 The molecular basis of sickle-cell disease: a point mutation. The 
allele that causes sickle-cell disease differs from the wild-type (normal) allele by a single DNA 
nucleotide pair. The micrographs are SEMs of a normal red blood cell (on the left) and a sickled 
red blood cell (right) from individuals homozygous for wild-type and mutant alleles, respectively.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation:  
Sickle-Cell Disease 
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   407 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 409 ===

408 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
mRNA5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿DNA template strand 5¿
Protein
CUAA
Stop
Carboxyl endAmino end
AUGAAGUU GG
Met Lys Phe Gly
U
5¿ CUAAAUGAAGUUGG
CTAAATGAAGTT GG T
GATTTACTTCAA CC A
5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
UUAA
Stop
AUGAAGUU GG
Met Lys Phe Gly
U
TTAAATGAAGTT GG T
AATTTACTTCAA CC A
5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
CUAA
Stop
AUGAAGUU AG
Met Lys Phe Ser
U
CTAAATGAAGTT AGT
GATTTACTTCAA TCA
5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
UUAAAUG UAGUU GG
Met
U
CTAAATG TAGTT GG T
GATTTAC ATCAA CC A
Silent: No effect on the amino acid sequence
U instead of C
A instead of G
T instead of C
3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
Met Lys Leu Ala
CTAAATGAAGTTGG
GATTTACTTCAACC
Frameshift causing extensive missense (1-nucleotide-pair deletion)
missing
missing
A instead of T
A instead of G
5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
GCUA
Stop
Stop Stop
AUG UAAGU UG
Met
U
GCTAATG TAAGT TG T
CGAT
A
A
TTAC ATTCA AC A
Frameshift causing immediate nonsense (1-nucleotide-pair insertion)
Extra U
Extra A
U instead of A
A
U
5¿ 3¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
AUG UUUGG AA CU
Met Phe Gly
AAATG TTTGGCT
TTTAC AAACCGA
3-nucleotide-pair deletion:  No frameshift, but one amino acid is 
missing. A 3-nucleotide-pair insertion (not shown) would lead to 
an extra amino acid.
missingTC T
missingAG A
Wild type
(a) Nucleotide-pair substitution (b) Nucleotide-pair insertion or deletion
Missense: A range of effects depending on the location within the 
protein and the identity of the new amino acid
Nonsense: Effect depends on how close the new stop codon is to the 
beginning of the coding sequence
. Figure 17.27 Types of small-scale mutations that affect mRNA sequence. All but one of the 
types shown here also affect the amino acid sequence of the encoded polypeptide.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough • Animation: Mutation Types
hemoglobin shown in Figure 17.26 or in the active site of 
an enzyme as shown in Figure 6.19—can significantly alter 
protein activity. Occasionally, such a mutation leads to an 
improved protein or one with novel capabilities, but much 
more often such mutations are neutral or detrimental, lead-
ing to a useless or less active protein that impairs cellular 
function. A second example of a missense mutation is a 
mutation in the tyrosinase gene that causes the albino phe-
notype in the Asinara donkey. Recently, Italian researchers 
sequenced the tyrosinase gene in donkeys from this wild pop-
ulation and showed that a recessive mutation is responsible 
for the lack of pigment. A C is changed to a G in this gene, 
resulting in a histidine being added to the protein instead of 
an aspartic acid. The changed amino acid is in a site in tyrosi-
nase that normally binds a copper atom, and it makes the 
enzyme incapable of binding copper, rendering it nonfunc-
tional. As in the case of sickle-cell disease, just one change in 
a nucleotide base results in a dramatic phenotypic change.
Substitution mutations are usually missense mutations; 
that is, the altered codon still codes for an amino acid and 
thus makes sense, although not necessarily the right sense. 
But a point mutation can also change a codon for an amino 
acid into a stop codon. This is called a nonsense mutation, 
and it causes translation to be terminated prematurely; the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   408 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 410 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 409
alter the reading frame of the genetic message, the triplet 
grouping of nucleotides on the mRNA that is read dur-
ing translation. Such a mutation, called a frameshift 
mutation, occurs whenever the number of nucleotides 
inserted or deleted is not a multiple of three. All nucleotides 
downstream of the deletion or insertion will be improperly 
grouped into codons; the result will be extensive missense 
mutations, usually ending sooner or later in a nonsense 
mutation that leads to premature termination. Unless 
the frameshift is very near the end of the gene, the pro-
tein is almost certain to be nonfunctional. Insertions and 
deletions also occur outside of coding regions; these are 
not called frameshift mutations, but can have effects on 
the phenotype—for instance, they can affect how a gene 
is expressed.
resulting polypeptide will be shorter than the polypeptide 
encoded by the normal gene. Most nonsense mutations lead 
to nonfunctional proteins.
In the Problem-Solving Exercise, you’ll work with a few 
common single nucleotide-pair substitution mutations in 
the gene encoding insulin, some or all of which may lead to 
diabetes. You will classify these mutations into one of the 
types we just described and characterize the change in the 
amino acid sequence.
Insertions and Deletions
Insertions and deletions are additions or losses of nucleo-
tide pairs in a gene (Figure 17.27b). These mutations have 
a disastrous effect on the resulting protein more often than 
substitutions do. Insertion or deletion of nucleotides may 
In this exercise, you will determine the effect of mutations within insulin gene 
sequences in infant diabetes patients.
Your Approach Suppose you are a medical geneticist presented with three infant 
patients, all of whom have a nucleotide-pair substitution in their insulin gene. It is 
your job to analyze each mutation to figure out its effect on the amino acid sequence 
of the insulin protein. To identify the mutation in each patient, you will compare his 
or her individual insulin complementary DNA (cDNA) sequence to that of the wild-
type cDNA. (cDNA is a double-stranded DNA molecule that is based on the mRNA 
sequence and thus contains only the portion of a gene that is translated—introns are 
not included. cDNA sequences are commonly used to compare the coding regions 
of genes.) Identifying the codons that have been changed will tell you which, if any, 
amino acids are altered in the patient’s insulin protein.
Your Data You will analyze the cDNA codons for amino acids 35–54 (of the 110 
amino acids) of each patient’s insulin protein, so the start codon (AUG) is not pres-
ent. The sequences of the wild-type cDNA and the patients’ cDNA are shown below, 
arranged in codons.
CTG
CTG
CTG
CTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GTG
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
GCT
GCT
GCT
GCT
CTC
CTC
CTC
CTC
TAC
TAC
TAC
TAC
CTA
CTA
CTA
CTA
TGC
TGC
TGC
TGC
GGG
GGG
GGG
GGG
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
CGA
CGA
CGA
CGA
GGC
GGC
GGC
GGC
TTC
TGC
TCC
 
TTC
TTC
TTC
TTC
 
TTG
TAC
TAC
TAC
TAC
ACA
ACA
ACA
ACA
CCC
CCC
CCC
CCC
AAG
AAG
AAG
AAG
ACC
ACC
ACC
ACC
Wild-type  cDNA
Patient   1  cDNA
Patient   2  cDNA
Patient   3  cDNA
5¿–
5¿–
5¿–
5¿–
–3¿
–3¿
–3¿
–3¿
Data from N. Nishi and K. Nanjo, Insulin gene mutations and diabetes, Journal of Diabetes  
Investigation 2:92–100 (2011).
Your Analysis
1.  Compare each patient’s cDNA sequence to the wild-type cDNA sequence. Circle 
the codons where a nucleotide-pair substitution mutation has occurred.
2. Use a codon table (see Figure 17.6) to identify the amino acid encoded by the 
codon with the mutation in each patient’s insulin sequence, and compare it to 
the amino acid encoded by the codon in the corresponding wild-type sequence. 
As is standard practice with DNA sequences, the coding (nontemplate) strand of 
the cDNA has been provided, so to convert it to mRNA for use with the codon 
table, you only need to change T to U. Classify each patient’s nucleotide-pair 
substitution mutation: Is it a silent, missense, or nonsense mutation? Explain, 
for each answer.
3. Compare the structure of the amino acid you identified in each patient’s insulin 
sequence to that of the corresponding amino acid in the wild-type sequence 
(see Figure 5.14). Given that each patient has neonatal diabetes, discuss how 
the change of amino acid in each might have affected the insulin protein and 
thus resulted in the disease. (Consider the chemical nature of the side chains.)
 Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving Exercise 
can be assigned in Mastering Biology. Or a more 
extensive investigation called “Solve It: Which Insulin 
Mutations May Result in Disease?” can be assigned.
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Are insulin mutations the 
cause of three infants’ 
neonatal diabetes?
Insulin is a hormone that acts as a key 
regulator of blood glucose level, and insu-
lin deficiency can lead to diabetes. In some 
cases of neonatal (newborn) diabetes, the 
gene coding for the insulin protein has a 
nucleotide-pair substitution mutation that 
alters the protein structure enough to cause 
it to malfunction. Doctors can use DNA 
sequence information to diagnose diabetes 
and other diseases. For example, the insulin 
gene sequence of a patient with neonatal dia-
betes can be analyzed to determine if it has 
a mutation and, if so, its effect.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   409 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 411 ===

410 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
technique to change specific genes in living cells, in part 
to try to correct genes that cause disease. Over the past 15 
years, biologists have developed a powerful new technique 
for gene editing, called the CRISPR-Cas9 system, that 
is transforming the field of genetic engineering, the direct 
manipulation of genes for practical purposes. Cas9 is a bac-
terial protein that helps defend bacteria against the viruses 
that infect them (bacteriophages). In bacterial cells, Cas9 
acts together with “guide RNA” made from the CRISPR 
region of the bacterial genome. (Figure 26.7 explains how 
this defense system works in bacteria.)
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Jennifer Doudna:  
CRISPR Provides a Tool for Changing Genes 
Similar to other DNA-cutting enzymes involved in DNA 
repair (described in Concept 16.2), Cas9 is a nuclease that 
cuts double-stranded DNA molecules. The power of Cas9 for 
gene editing is that the Cas9 protein will cut any sequence 
to which it is directed. Cas9 is directed to its target by a guide 
RNA molecule that it binds and uses as a homing device, cut-
ting both strands of any DNA sequence that is complemen-
tary to the guide RNA. Scientists have been able to exploit the 
function of Cas9 by introducing a Cas9–guide RNA complex 
into a cell they wish to alter (Figure 17.28). The guide RNA 
in the complex is engineered to be complementary to the 
“target” gene. Cas9 cuts both strands of the target DNA, and 
the resulting broken ends of DNA trigger a DNA repair system 
(similar to that shown in Figure 16.20). When there is no 
undamaged DNA for the enzymes of the repair system to use 
as a template, as shown at the bottom left of Figure 17.28, 
the repair enzymes introduce or remove random nucleotides 
while rejoining the ends. Generally, this process alters the 
DNA sequence so that the gene no longer works properly. 
This technique is a highly successful way for researchers to 
“knock out” (disable) a given gene to study what that gene 
does in an organism.
But what about using this system to help treat genetic 
diseases? Researchers have modified the technique so that 
the CRISPR-Cas9 system can be used to repair a gene that 
has a harmful mutation. They introduce a segment from 
the normal (functional) gene along with the CRISPR-Cas9 
system. After Cas9 cuts the target DNA, repair enzymes can 
use the normal DNA as a template to repair the target DNA 
at the break point. In this way, the CRISPR-Cas9 system edits 
the defective gene so that it is corrected (see the bottom 
right of Figure 17.28).
In 2018, researchers reported promising results using the 
CRISPR-Cas 9 system in an attempt to correct the genetic 
New Mutations and Mutagens
Mutations can arise in a number of ways. Errors during DNA 
replication or recombination can lead to nucleotide-pair 
substitutions, insertions, or deletions, as well as to mutations 
affecting longer stretches of DNA. If an incorrect nucleotide 
is added to a growing chain during replication, for example, 
the base on that nucleotide will then be mismatched with the 
nucleotide base on the other strand. In many cases, the error 
will be corrected by DNA proofreading and repair systems 
(see Concept 16.2). Otherwise, the incorrect base will be used 
as a template in the next round of replication, resulting in a 
mutation. Such mutations are called spontaneous mutations. 
It is difficult to calculate the rate at which such muta-
tions occur. Rough estimates have been made of the rate of 
mutation during DNA replication for both E. coli and eukary-
otes, and the numbers are similar: About one nucleotide in 
every 1010 is altered, and the change is passed on to the next 
generation of cells.
A number of physical and chemical agents, called 
mutagens, interact with DNA in ways that cause mutations. 
In the 1920s, Hermann Muller discovered that X-rays caused 
genetic changes in fruit flies, and he used X-rays to make 
Drosophila mutants for his genetic studies (just as Beadle 
and Tatum did with their Neurospora cells). But Muller also 
recognized an alarming implication of his discovery: X-rays 
and other forms of high-energy radiation pose hazards to the 
genetic material of people as well as laboratory organisms. 
Mutagenic radiation, a physical mutagen, includes ultravio-
let (UV) light, which can cause disruptive thymine dimers in 
DNA (see Figure 16.20).
Chemical mutagens fall into several categories. Nucleotide 
analogs are chemicals similar to normal DNA nucleotides but 
that pair incorrectly during DNA replication. Other chemical 
mutagens interfere with correct DNA replication by inserting 
themselves into the DNA and distorting the double helix. Still 
other mutagens cause chemical changes in bases that change 
their pairing properties.
Researchers have developed a variety of methods to test 
the mutagenic activity of chemicals. A major application  
of these tests is the preliminary screening of chemicals  
to identify those that may cause cancer. This approach makes 
sense because most carcinogens (cancer-causing chemicals) 
are mutagenic, and conversely, most mutagens are 
carcinogenic.
Using CRISPR to Edit Genes and Correct 
Disease-Causing Mutations
Ever since biologists have understood how disease-causing 
proteins were the result of mutations in genes, they have 
sought techniques for gene editing—altering genes in a 
specific, predictable way. Their aim has been to use such a 
 Mastering Biology Interview with Francisco 
Mojica: Discovering CRISPR in bacteria 
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   410 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 412 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 411
defect that causes sickle-cell disease. They edited human cells 
from patients with sickle-cell disease and injected them into 
bone marrow in mice. After 19 weeks, the gene remained 
corrected in 20–40% of the injected cells. Researchers, phy-
sicians, and patients alike are excited about the potential 
of CRISPR technology to treat or even cure human diseases 
that have a genetic basis, such as sickle-cell, Alzheimer’s, 
and Parkinson’s diseases, as well as some types of cancer. 
However, there are still concerns about using CRISPR-treated 
cells in humans because of possible effects on genes that are 
not being targeted; this is an active area of research.
Jennifer Doudna, a co-discoverer of CRISPR-Cas9, recog-
nized not only its incredible potential but also the danger 
of its misapplication. After having a dream in which Adolf 
Hitler asked her what could be done with this gene-editing 
tool, Doudna realized it was imperative to spend some time 
reflecting on ethical considerations. In 2015, she convened a 
conference of biologists who agreed at the end of the meeting 
to urge extreme caution as the field moves forward—and the 
discussion continues.
What Is a Gene? Revisiting the Question
Our definition of a gene has evolved over the past few 
chapters, as it has through the history of genetics. We 
began with the Mendelian concept of a gene as a discrete 
unit of inheritance that affects a phenotypic character 
(Chapter 14). We saw that Morgan and his colleagues 
assigned such genes to specific loci on chromosomes 
(Chapter 15). We went on to view a gene as a region of 
specific nucleotide sequence along the length of the DNA 
molecule of a chromosome (Chapter 16). Finally, in this 
chapter, we have considered a functional definition of a 
gene as a DNA sequence that codes for a specific polypep-
tide chain or a functional RNA molecule, such as a tRNA. 
All these definitions are useful, depending on the context 
in which genes are being studied.
We have noted that merely saying a gene codes for a poly-
peptide is an oversimplification. Most eukaryotic genes con-
tain noncoding segments (such as introns), so large portions 
of these genes have no corresponding segments in polypep-
tides. Molecular biologists also often include promoters and 
certain other regulatory regions of DNA within the boundar-
ies of a gene. These DNA sequences are not transcribed, but 
they can be considered part of the functional gene because 
they must be present for transcription to occur. Our defini-
tion of a gene must also be broad enough to include the DNA 
that is transcribed into rRNA, tRNA, and other RNAs that are 
not translated. These genes have no polypeptide products but 
play crucial roles in the cell. Thus, we arrive at the following 
definition: A gene is a region of DNA that can be expressed to 
produce a final functional product that is either a polypeptide or 
an RNA molecule.
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿ 5¿ 3¿
5¿
Active sites that
can cut DNA
Complementary
sequence that can
bind to a target gene
Guide RNA engineered to
“guide” the Cas9 protein
to a target gene 
Cas9–guide RNA complex
Cas9 protein
and guide RNA
are allowed to
bind to each other,
forming a complex
that is then introduced
into a cell.
1
In the nucleus, the
complementary
sequence of the 
guide RNA binds to part
of the target gene. The
active sites of the Cas9
protein cut the DNA
on both strands.
2
The broken strands
of DNA are “repaired”
by the cell in one
of two ways:
Scientists can disable (“knock
out”) the target gene
to study its normal function.
No template is provided, and
repair enzymes insert and/or
delete random nucleotides,
making the gene nonfunctional.
3
Cas9 active sites
Guide RNA
complementary
sequence
Part of the
target gene
Resulting cut
in target gene
Normal
(functional)
gene for use
as a template
NUCLEUS
CYTOPLASM
Cas9 protein
Random nucleotides Normal nucleotides
OR
If the target gene has a 
mutation, it can be repaired 
by providing a normal copy 
of the gene. Repair enzymes 
use the normal gene as a 
template and synthesize the 
correct gene sequence.
. Figure 17.28 Gene editing using the CRISPR-Cas9 system.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   411 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 413 ===

17 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
DNA replication, except that in RNA, uracil (U) substitutes for 
thymine (T).
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
Promoter
RNA polymerase
Template strand
of DNA
RNA transcript
3¿
Transcription unit
• The three stages of transcription are initiation, elongation, and 
termination. A promoter sequence, often including a TATA 
box in eukaryotes, establishes where RNA synthesis is initiated. 
Trans cr iption factors help eukaryotic RNA polymerase recognize 
promoter sequences, forming a transcription initiation  
complex. T ermination differs in bacteria and eukaryotes.
? Compare the initiation of transcription in bacteria and eukaryotes.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT CHECK 17.5
1. What happens when one nucleotide pair is lost from the 
middle of the coding sequence of a gene?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Individuals heterozygous for 
the sickle-cell allele are generally healthy but show phe-
notypic effects of the allele under some circumstances 
(see Figure 14.17). Explain in terms of gene expression.
3. DRAW IT The template strand of a gene includes this sequence:
3′-TACTTGTCCGATATC-5′. The sequence is mutated to 
3′-TACTTGTCCAATATC-5′. For both wild-type and mutant 
sequences, draw the double-stranded DNA, the resulting 
mRNA, and the amino acid sequence each encodes. What is 
the effect of the mutation on the amino acid sequence?
4. WHAT IF? How could you use the CRISPR-Cas9 system to 
correct the mutation described in question 3? Based on the 
answer to question 3, would this be worth doing?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
When considering phenotypes, however, it is often use-
ful to start by focusing on genes that code for polypeptides. 
In this chapter, you have learned in molecular terms how 
a typical gene is expressed—by transcription into RNA and 
then translation into a polypeptide that forms a protein of 
specific structure and function. Proteins, in turn, bring about 
an organism’s observable phenotype.
A given type of cell expresses only a subset of its genes. 
This is an essential feature in multicellular organisms: You’d 
be in trouble if the lens cells in your eyes started expressing 
the genes for hair proteins, which are normally expressed 
only in hair follicle cells! Gene expression is precisely 
regulated, which we’ll explore in the next chapter, begin-
ning with the simpler case of bacteria and continuing with 
eukaryotes.
CONCEPT 17.1
Genes specify proteins via transcription  
and translation (pp. 386–392)
• Beadle and Tatum’s studies of mutant strains of Neurospora led  
to the one gene–one polypeptide hypothesis. During gene  
expression, the information encoded in genes is used to make 
specific polypeptide chains (enzymes and other proteins) or RNA 
molecules.
• Transcription is the synthesis of RNA complementary to a 
template strand of DNA. Translation is the synthesis of a 
polypeptide whose amino acid sequence is specified by the nucle-
otide sequence in messenger RNA (mRNA).
• Genetic information is encoded as a sequence of nonoverlap-
ping nucleotide triplets, or codons. A codon in mRNA either 
is translated into an amino acid (61 of the 64 codons) or serves 
as a stop signal (3 codons). Codons must be read in the correct 
reading frame.
? Describe the process of gene expression, by which a gene affects the 
phenotype of an organism.
CONCEPT 17.2
Transcription is the DNA-directed synthesis of RNA:  
A Closer Look (pp. 392–394)
• RNA synthesis is catalyzed by RNA polymerase, which links 
together RNA nucleotides complementary to a DNA template 
strand. Transcription follows the same base-pairing rules as 
CONCEPT 17.3
Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after transcription  
(pp. 395–397)
• Eukaryotic mRNAs undergo RNA processing, which includes 
RNA splicing, the addition of a modified nucleotide 5′ cap to the 
5′ end, and the addition of a poly-A tail to the 3′ end. The pro-
cessed mRNA includes an untranslated region (5′ UTR or 3′ UTR) 
at each end of the coding segment.
• Most eukaryotic genes are split into segments: They have introns 
interspersed among the exons (the regions included in the 
mRNA). In RNA splicing, introns are removed and exons joined. 
RNA splicing is typically carried out by spliceosomes, but in 
412 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   412 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 414 ===

 CHAPTER 17  Expression of Genes 413
Mutations of one or a few nucleotides can affect 
protein structure and function (pp. 407–412)
• Small-scale mutations include point mutations, changes 
in one DNA nucleotide pair, which may lead to production of 
nonfunctional proteins. Nucleotide-pair substitutions 
can cause missense or nonsense mutations. Nucleotide-
pair insertions or deletions may produce frameshift 
mutations.
• Spontaneous mutations can occur during DNA replication, 
recombination, or repair. Chemical and physical mutagens 
cause DNA damage that can alter genes.
• The CRISPR-Cas9 system is a powerful new gene-editing 
technique with the potential to correct genetic mutations that 
cause disease. Significant technical and ethical questions have 
been raised about how this could or should be used.
? What will be the results of chemically modifying one nucleotide base 
of a gene? What role is played by DNA repair systems in the cell?
some cases, RNA alone catalyzes its own splicing. The proper-
ties of RNA allow some RNAs (called ribozymes) to act as 
catalysts. The presence of introns allows for alternative RNA 
splicing.
Exon IntronExon Intron
RNA splicing
Exon5¿ 3¿
Coding
segment
Pre-mRNA
mRNA
Poly-A tail5¿ Cap
5¿ UTR 3¿ UTR
? What function do the 5′ cap and the poly-A tail serve on a eukaryotic 
mRNA?
CONCEPT 17.4
Translation is the RNA-directed synthesis  
of a polypeptide: A Closer Look (pp. 397–406)
• A cell translates an mRNA message into protein using transfer 
RNAs (tRNAs). After being bound to a specific amino acid 
by an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, a tRNA lines up via 
its anticodon at the complementary codon on mRNA. 
A ribosome, made up of ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and 
proteins, facilitates this coupling with binding sites for mRNA 
and tRNA.
• Ribosomes coordinate the three stages of translation: initiation, 
elongation, and termination. The formation of peptide bonds be-
tween amino acids is catalyzed by rRNAs as tRNAs move through 
the A and P sites and exit through the E site.
Polypeptide
tRNA
Amino
acid
Anti-
codon
mRNA
Ribosome
Codon
EA
• After translation, during protein processing, proteins may be 
modified by cleavage or by attachment of sugars, lipids, phos-
phates, or other chemical groups.
• Free ribosomes in the cytosol initiate synthesis of all proteins, but 
proteins with a signal peptide are synthesized on the ER.
• A gene can be transcribed by multiple RNA polymerases simul-
taneously. Also, a single mRNA molecule can be translated  
simultaneously by a number of ribosomes, forming a  
polyribosome. In bacteria, these processes are coupled,  
but in eukaryotes they are separated in space and time by  
the nuclear membrane.
? How do tRNAs function in the context of the ribosome during 
translation?
CONCEPT 17.5
8. Would the coupling of the processes shown in Figure 17.24 be 
found in a eukaryotic cell? Explain why or why not.
9. Complete the following table:
FunctionsType of RNA
Messenger RNA (mRNA)
In a ribosome, plays a structural role; 
as a ribozyme, plays a catalytic role 
(catalyzes peptide bond formation)
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
Primary transcript
Small RNAs in the spliceosome
10. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Most amino acids are coded for 
by a set of similar codons (see Figure 17.6). Propose at least one 
evolutionary explanation to account for this pattern.
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY During the sequence analysis of a 
eukaryotic gene, you discover that it contains a restriction 
site for the enzyme NotI. This site is 1500 bp away from the 
restriction site for the enzyme XbaI. When the cDNA for the 
gene is treated with both the enzymes, the two sites are found 
to be only 1 10 bp apart. What is the most likely reason for this 
result?
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION Evolution 
accounts for the unity and diversity of life, and the continuity 
of life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA. 
In a short essay (100–150 words), discuss how the fidelity with 
which DNA is inherited is related to the processes of evolution. 
(Review the discussion of proofreading and DNA repair in 
Concept 16.2.)
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   413 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 415 ===

414 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Some mutations result in proteins that function well at one 
temperature but are nonfunctional at a different (usually 
higher) temperature. Siamese cats have such a “temperature-
sensitive” mutation in a gene encoding an enzyme that makes 
dark pigment in the fur. The mutation results in the breed’s 
distinctive point markings and lighter body color (see the 
photo). Using this information and what you learned in the 
chapter, explain the pattern of the cat’s fur pigmentation.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How is green fluorescent protein (GFP) used as a marker  
for gene expression? Go to “Lighting up Life” 
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C17_PRF.indd   414 3/21/20   2:09 AM

=== SIDE 416 ===

415
Figure 18.1 Anableps anableps, or “cuatro ojos” (“four eyes”), glides through lakes 
and ponds in South America, the upper half of each eye protruding from the water. 
The eye’s upper half is well-suited for aerial vision and the lower half for aquatic 
vision. All eye cells, however, contain the same genes.
Control of Gene Expression18
How can two cells with the same set of genes 
Differential gene 
expression is the expression 
of different genes by cells with 
the same genome. The uniquely 
expressed genes allow cells to 
carry out their speciƂc function
Eye cell specialized 
for aerial 
vision
Eye cell 
specialized 
for aquatic vision
SpeciƂc transcription
factors
RNA polymerase II
Expressed
To be expressed, each gene requires a particular set of transcription factors. 
Different cells have different sets of speciƂc transcription factors
Gene 2
Gene 2
Gene 3
Gene 1
Gene 3
Gene 1
Gene 1 product 
(optimizes 
eyesight in air)
Gene 3 product 
(required in all 
eye cells)
Gene 2 product 
(optimizes eye- 
sight in water)
Gene 3 product 
(required in all 
eye cells)
No transcription factors 
for Gene 2 in this cell, so 
Gene 2 is not expressed.
No transcription factors 
for Gene 1 in this cell, so 
Gene 1 is not expressed.
Expressed
Expressed
Expressed
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 18
• Animation: Control of Gene Expression
• Animation: Causes of Cancer
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Regulation of Gene Expression in 
Eukaryotes
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Analyzing DNA 
Deletion Experiments
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• The trp and lac Operons (Concept 18.1)
18.1 Bacteria often respond to 
environmental change by 
regulating transcription p. 416
18.2 Eukaryotic gene expression is 
regulated at many stages p. 420
18.3 Noncoding RNAs play multiple roles 
in controlling gene expression p. 429
18.4 A program of differential gene 
expression leads to the different cell 
types in a multicellular organism p. 431
18.5 Cancer results from genetic changes 
that affect cell cycle control  p. 438
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Make a visual study guide: Draw a 
region of DNA representing a gene. For 
each level of gene regulation that you 
read about, draw a sketch of your gene 
being regulated at that level. A drawing 
of chromatin modification regulation is 
shown as an example.
DNA Gene
Gene in region of
tightly condensed
chromatin
(heterochromatin);
gene not expressed
Nucleosome
(DNA +
histones)
Chromatin modiﬁcation
and loosening
Chromatin modiﬁcation regulation
Gene in region of loosely condensed chromatin 
(euchromatin); gene may be expressed
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   415 14/03/20   2:49 AM

=== SIDE 417 ===

416 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Operons: The Basic Concept
E. coli synthesizes the amino acid tryptophan from a precursor 
molecule in the three-step pathway shown in Figure 18.2. Each 
reaction in the pathway is catalyzed by a specific enzyme, and 
the five genes that code for the subunits of these enzymes are 
clustered together on the bacterial chromosome. A single pro-
moter serves all five genes, which together constitute a transcrip-
tion unit. (Recall that a promoter is a site where RNA polymerase 
can bind to DNA and begin transcription; see Figure 17.8.) 
Thus, transcription gives rise to one long mRNA molecule that 
codes for the five polypeptides making up the enzymes in the 
tryptophan pathway (Figure 18.3a). The cell can translate this 
one mRNA into five separate polypeptides because the mRNA 
is punctuated with start and stop codons that signal where the 
coding sequence for each polypeptide begins and ends.
A key advantage of grouping genes of related function 
into one transcription unit is that a single “on-off switch” 
can control the whole cluster of functionally related genes; 
in other words, these genes are coordinately controlled. When 
an E. coli cell must make tryptophan for itself because its sur-
rounding environment lacks this amino acid, all the enzymes 
for the metabolic pathway are synthesized at the same time. 
The on-off switch is a segment of DNA called an operator. 
Both its location and name suit its function: Positioned within 
the promoter or, in some cases, between the promoter and 
the enzyme-coding genes, the operator controls the access of 
Enzyme 2
Enzyme 1
trpE
trpD
trpC
trpB
trpA
Feedback
inhibition
Regulation
of gene
expression
Regulation of enzyme
production
Regulation of enzyme
activity
(a) (b)
Precursor Genes that
encode enzymes
1, 2, and 3
Tryptophan
–
–
Enzyme 3
. Figure 18.2 Regulation of a metabolic pathway. In the pathway 
for tryptophan synthesis, an abundance of tryptophan can both 
(a) inhibit the activity of the first enzyme in the pathway (feedback 
inhibition), a rapid response, and (b) repress expression of the genes 
encoding all subunits of the enzymes in the pathway, a longer-term 
response. The symbol – stands for inhibition.
CONCEPT 18.1
Bacteria often respond  
to environmental change  
by regulating transcription
Bacterial cells that can conserve resources and energy have a 
selective advantage over cells that are unable to do so. Thus, 
natural selection has favored bacteria that express only the 
genes whose products are needed by the cell.
Consider, for instance, an individual Escherichia coli  
(E. coli) cell living in a human colon, dependent for its nutri-
ents on the whimsical eating habits of its host. If the envi-
ronment is lacking in the amino acid tryptophan, which the 
bacterium needs to survive, the cell responds by activating 
a metabolic pathway that makes tryptophan from another 
compound. If the human host later eats a tryptophan-rich 
meal, the bacterial cell stops producing tryptophan, thus 
avoiding wasting resources to produce a substance that is 
readily available from the surrounding solution.
A metabolic pathway can be controlled on two levels, as 
shown for the synthesis of tryptophan in Figure 18.2. First, 
cells can adjust the activity of enzymes already present. This 
is a fairly rapid physiological response, which relies on the 
sensitivity of many enzymes to chemical cues that increase 
or decrease their catalytic activity (see Concept 6.5). The 
activity of the first enzyme in the pathway is inhibited 
by the pathway’s end product—tryptophan, in this case 
(Figure 18.2a). Thus, if tryptophan accumulates in a cell, it 
shuts down the synthesis of more tryptophan by inhibit-
ing enzyme activity. Such feedback inhibition, typical of 
anabolic (biosynthetic) pathways, allows a cell to adapt to 
short-term fluctuations in the supply of a substance it needs 
(see Figure 6.21).
Second, cells can adjust the production level of certain 
enzymes via a genetic mechanism; that is, they can regulate 
the expression of the genes encoding the enzymes. If, in our 
example, the environment provides all the tryptophan the 
cell needs, the cell stops making the enzymes that catalyze 
the synthesis of tryptophan (Figure 18.2b). In this case, the 
control of enzyme production occurs at the level of transcrip-
tion, the synthesis of messenger RNA from the genes that 
code for these enzymes.
Regulation of the tryptophan synthesis pathway is just 
one example of how bacteria tune their metabolism to chang-
ing environments. Many genes of the bacterial genome are 
switched on or off by changes in the metabolic status of the 
cell; some genes are regulated singly and others as groups of 
related genes. One basic mechanism for this type of regula-
tion of groups of genes in bacteria, described as the operon 
model, was discovered in 1961 by François Jacob and Jacques 
Monod at the Pasteur Institute in Paris. Let’s see what an 
operon is and how it works.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   416 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 418 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 417
VISUAL SKILLS Describe what happens to the trp operon as the cell 
uses up its store of tryptophan.
although at a low rate, and a few trp repressor molecules are 
always present in E. coli cells. Why, then, is the trp operon not 
switched off permanently? First, the binding of repressors to 
operators is reversible. An operator alternates between two 
states: one with the repressor bound and one without the 
repressor bound. The relative duration of the repressor-bound 
state is higher when more active repressor molecules are pres-
ent. Second, the trp repressor, like most regulatory proteins, is 
an allosteric protein, with two alternative shapes: active and 
inactive (see Figure 6.20). The trp repressor is synthesized in 
the inactive form, which has little affinity for the trp operator. 
Only when a tryptophan molecule binds to the trp repressor at 
an allosteric site does the repressor protein change to the active 
form that can attach to the operator, turning the operon off.
Tryptophan functions in this system as a corepressor, 
a small molecule that cooperates with a repressor protein 
to switch an operon off. As tryptophan accumulates, more 
tryptophan molecules associate with trp repressor molecules, 
which can then bind to the trp operator and shut down pro-
duction of the tryptophan pathway enzymes. If the cell’s 
tryptophan level drops, many fewer trp repressor proteins 
would have tryptophan bound, rendering them inactive; they 
would dissociate from the operator, allowing transcription of 
the operon’s genes to resume. The trp operon is one example 
of how gene expression can respond to changes in the cell’s 
internal and external environment.
RNA polymerase to the genes. Together, the operator, the pro-
moter, and the genes they control—the entire stretch of DNA 
required for enzyme production for the tryptophan pathway—
constitute an operon. The trp operon (trp for tryptophan) is 
one of many operons in the E. coli genome (see Figure 18.3a).
If the operator is the operon’s switch for controlling tran-
scription, how does this switch work? By itself, the trp operon 
is turned on; that is, RNA polymerase can bind to the promoter 
and transcribe the genes of the operon. The trp operon can 
be switched off by a protein that is called the trp repressor. A 
repressor binds to the operator, preventing RNA polymerase 
from transcribing the genes, often by preventing RNA poly-
merase from binding (Figure 18.3b). A repressor protein is spe-
cific for the operator of a particular operon. For example, the trp 
repressor, which switches off the trp operon by binding to the trp 
operator, has no effect on other operons in the E. coli genome.
A repressor protein is encoded by a regulatory gene—in 
this case, a gene called trpR; trpR is located some distance from 
the trp operon and has its own promoter. Regulatory genes are 
among the bacterial genes that are expressed continuously, 
(a)Tryptophan absent, repressor inactive, operon on. RNA polymerase attaches to the DNA at the 
operon’s promoter and transcribes the operon’s genes. Enzymes for tryptophan synthesis are made.
3¿
5¿
Protein Inactive trp
repressor
mRNA 5¿
DNA
mRNA
RNA 
polymerase
trp promoter
trp operator
Start codon Stop codon
Genes of operon
trpC trpB
Promoter Regulatory gene
trpR trpE
trpE
trpD
Polypeptide subunits 
that make up enzymes 
for tryptophan synthesis
(see previous Ƃgure)
trp operon
trpA
(b)Tryptophan present, repressor active, operon off. As 
tryptophan accumulates, it inhibits its own production by activating 
the repressor protein, which binds to the operator, blocking 
transcription. Enzymes for tryptophan synthesis are not made.
3¿
5¿
Protein
DNA
mRNA
No 
RNA
made
Active trp
repressor                 
Tryptophan
(corepressor)
trpR
ED CB A
m Figure 18.3 The trp operon in E. coli: regulated synthesis  
of repressible enzymes. Tryptophan is an amino acid produced by 
an anabolic pathway catalyzed by three enzymes (see Figure 18.2).  
(a) The five genes encoding the polypeptide subunits of the enzymes 
in this pathway are grouped, along with a promoter, into the trp 
operon. The trp operator (the repressor binding site) is located within 
the trp promoter (the RNA polymerase binding site). (b) Accumulation 
of tryptophan, the end product of the pathway, represses transcription 
of the trp operon, thus blocking synthesis of all the enzymes in the 
pathway and shutting down tryptophan production.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   417 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 419 ===

418 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
3¿
5¿
Protein
mRNA 5¿
DNA
mRNA
RNA polymerase Start codon Stop codon
lacY lacAlacZ
lacZ
lac operon
(a)Lactose absent, repressor active, operon off. The lac 
repressor is innately active, and in the absence of lactose it 
switches off the operon by binding to the operator. The 
enzymes for using lactose are not made.
3¿
5¿
Protein
DNA
mRNA
No 
RNA
made
Active lac
repressor                 
Inactive lac
repressor                 Allolactose
(inducer)
Enzymes for using lactose
lac promoterRegulatory
gene lac operator
d-Galactosidase Permease T ransacetylase
(b)Lactose present, repressor inactive, operon on. Allolactose, an isomer of lactose, binds to the 
repressor, inactivating it and “derepressing” the operon. The inactive repressor cannot bind to the 
operator, and so the genes of the lac operon are transcribed, and the enzymes for using lactose are made.
lacI
lacI
RNA 
polymerase
b Figure 18.4 The lac 
operon in E. coli: regulated 
synthesis of inducible 
enzymes. E. coli uses 
three enzymes to take up 
and metabolize lactose, 
the genes for which are 
clustered in the lac operon. 
The first gene, lacZ, codes 
for /uni03B2-galactosidase, which 
hydrolyzes lactose to glucose 
and galactose. The second, 
lacY, codes for a permease, 
the membrane protein 
that transports lactose into 
the cell. The third, lacA, 
codes for transacetylase, an 
enzyme that detoxifies other 
molecules entering the cell via 
the permease. Unusually, the 
gene for the lac repressor, lac I, 
is adjacent to the lac operon. 
The function of the teal region 
within the promoter will be 
revealed in Figure 18.5.
Repressible and Inducible Operons:  
Two Types of Negative Gene Regulation
The trp operon is said to be a repressible operon because its tran-
scription is usually on but can be inhibited (repressed) when 
a specific small molecule (in this case, tryptophan) binds 
allosterically to a regulatory protein. In contrast, an inducible 
operon is usually off but can be stimulated (induced) to be on 
when a specific small molecule interacts with a different regu-
latory protein. The classic example of an inducible operon is 
the lac operon (lac stands for “lactose”).
The disaccharide lactose (milk sugar) is available to E. coli  
when the bacterium is in contact with any dairy product. 
Lactose metabolism by E. coli begins with hydrolysis of the 
disaccharide into its component monosaccharides (glu-
cose and galactose), a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme 
/uni03B2-galactosidase. Only a few molecules of this enzyme are 
present in an E. coli cell growing in the absence of lactose. If 
lactose is added to the bacterium’s environment, however, 
the number of /uni03B2-galactosidase molecules in the cell increases 
1,000-fold within about 15 minutes. How can a cell ramp up 
enzyme production this quickly?
The gene for /uni03B2-galactosidase (lacZ) is part of the lac operon, 
which includes two other genes coding for enzymes that 
function in the use of lactose (Figure 18.4). The entire tran-
scription unit is under the command of one main operator 
and promoter. The regulatory gene, lacI, located outside the 
lac operon, codes for an allosteric repressor protein that can 
switch off the lac operon by binding to the lac operator. So 
far, this sounds just like regulation of the trp operon, but 
there is one important difference. Recall that the trp repres-
sor protein is inactive by itself and requires tryptophan as a 
corepressor in order to bind to the operator. The lac repressor, 
in contrast, is active by itself, binding to the operator and 
switching the lac operon off. In this case, a specific small mol-
ecule, called an inducer, inactivates the repressor.
For the lac operon, the inducer is allolactose, an isomer of 
lactose formed in small amounts from lactose that enters the 
cell. In the absence of lactose (and therefore allolactose), the 
lac repressor is in its active shape and binds to the operator; 
thus, the genes of the lac operon are silenced (Figure 18.4a). 
If lactose is added to the cell’s surroundings, allolactose binds 
to the lac repressor and alters its shape so the repressor can no 
longer bind to the operator. Without the lac repressor bound, 
the lac operon is transcribed into mRNA, and the enzymes for 
using lactose are made (Figure 18.4b).
In the context of gene regulation, the enzymes of the lac-
tose pathway are referred to as inducible enzymes because their 
synthesis is induced by a chemical signal (allolactose, in this 
case). Analogously, the enzymes for tryptophan synthesis 
are said to be repressible. Repressible enzymes generally func-
tion in anabolic pathways, which synthesize essential end 
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: The lac Operon in E. coli
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   418 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 420 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 419
products from raw materials (precursors). By suspending pro-
duction of an end product when it is already present in suffi-
cient quantity, the cell can allocate its organic precursors and 
energy for other uses. In contrast, inducible enzymes usually 
function in catabolic pathways, which break down a nutrient 
to simpler molecules. By producing the appropriate enzymes 
only when the nutrient is available, the cell avoids wasting 
energy and precursors making proteins that are not needed.
Regulation of both the trp and lac operons involves the 
negative control of genes because the operons are switched off by 
the active form of their respective repressor protein. It may be 
easier to see this for the trp operon, but it is also true for the lac 
operon. In the case of the lac operon, allolactose induces enzyme 
synthesis not by directly activating the lac operon, but by free-
ing it from the negative effect of the repressor (see Figure 18.4b). 
Gene regulation is said to be positive only when a regulatory pro-
tein interacts directly with the genome to increase transcription.
Positive Gene Regulation
When glucose and lactose are both present in its environ-
ment, E. coli preferentially uses glucose. The enzymes for glu-
cose breakdown in glycolysis (see Figure 10.8) are continually 
present. Only when lactose is present and glucose is in short 
supply does E. coli use lactose as an energy source, and only 
then does it synthesize appreciable quantities of the enzymes 
for lactose breakdown.
How does the E. coli cell sense the glucose concentra-
tion and relay this information to the lac operon? Again, 
the mechanism depends on the interaction of an allosteric 
regulatory protein with a small organic molecule, cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) in this case, which accumulates when glu-
cose is scarce (see Figure 9.11 for the structure of cAMP). 
The regulatory protein, called cAMP receptor protein (CRP), is 
an activator, a protein that binds to DNA and stimulates 
transcription of a gene. (CRP is also called catabolite activator 
protein, or CAP.) When cAMP binds to this regulatory protein, 
CRP assumes its active shape and can attach to a specific site 
at the upstream end of the lac promoter (Figure 18.5a). This 
attachment increases the affinity of RNA polymerase for the 
lac promoter, which is actually rather low even when no lac 
repressor is bound to the operator. By facilitating the binding 
of RNA polymerase to the promoter and thereby increasing 
the rate of transcription of the lac operon, the attachment 
of CRP to the promoter directly stimulates gene expression. 
Therefore, this mechanism qualifies as positive regulation.
If the amount of glucose in the cell increases, the cAMP 
concentration falls, and without cAMP, CRP detaches from the 
lac operon. Because CRP is inactive, RNA polymerase binds less 
efficiently to the promoter, and transcription of the lac operon 
proceeds only at a low level, even when lactose is present  
(Figure 18.5b). Thus, the lac operon is under dual control: nega-
tive control by the lac repressor and positive control by CRP. 
Whether or not transcription occurs is controlled by allolactose: 
RNA
polymerase
binds and
transcribes
lac promoter
Inactive lac
repressor
RNA polymerase
less likely to bind
lacI lacZ
lacZ
DNA
CRP-binding site
cAMP
Inactive
CRP
Active
CRP
lac operator
Allolactose
(a)Lactose present, glucose scarce (cAMP level high): 
abundant lac mRNA synthesized. If glucose is scarce, the 
high level of cAMP activates CRP , which binds to the promoter 
and increases RNA polymerase binding there. The lac operon 
produces large amounts of mRNA coding for the enzymes that 
the cell needs for use of lactose.
lac promoter
Inactive lac
repressor
lacI
DNA lac operator
(b)Lactose present, glucose present (cAMP level low): little 
lac mRNA synthesized. When glucose is present, cAMP is 
scarce, and CRP is unable to stimulate transcription at a 
signiƂcant rate, even though no repressor is bound.
Inactive
CRP
CRP-binding site
. Figure 18.5 Positive control of the lac operon by cAMP 
receptor protein (CRP). RNA polymerase has high affinity for the 
lac promoter only when CRP is bound to a DNA site at the upstream 
end of the promoter. CRP, in turn, attaches to its DNA site only when 
associated with cyclic AMP (cAMP), whose concentration in the cell rises 
when the glucose concentration falls. Thus, when glucose is present, 
even if lactose is also available, the cell preferentially catabolizes glucose 
and makes very low levels of the enzymes for using lactose.
Without allolactose, the lac repressor is active and the operon 
is off (transcription does not occur; see Figure 18.4a); with allo-
lactose, the lac repressor is inactive and the operon is on (tran-
scription occurs; see Figure 18.4b). The rate of transcription is 
controlled by whether CRP has cAMP bound to it: With bound 
cAMP, the rate is high; without it, the rate is low. It is as though 
the operon has both an on-off switch and a volume control.
In addition to regulating the lac operon, CRP helps regulate 
other operons that encode enzymes used in catabolic path-
ways. All told, it may affect the expression of more than 100 
genes in E. coli. When glucose is plentiful and CRP is inactive, 
the synthesis of enzymes that catabolize compounds other 
than glucose generally slows down. The ability to catabolize 
other compounds, such as lactose, enables a cell deprived of 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   419 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 421 ===

420 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
glucose to survive. The compounds present in any given cell 
at a certain moment determine which operons are switched 
on—the result of simple interactions of activator and repressor 
proteins with the promoters of the genes in question.
Primary 
transcript
mRNA in nucleus
mRNA in cytoplasm
Polypeptide
Active protein
Cellular function
(such as enzymatic
activity or structural
support)
Transport to 
cytoplasm
Degradation
of mRNA
Degradation
of protein
Transport to cellular
destination
CYTOPLASM
Chromatin
DNA
RNA
NUCLEUS
Signal
Gene available for transcription
Exon
Tail
Cap
Intron
RNA processing
Translation
Protein processing
Transcription
Chromatin 
modiƂECVion
DNA unpacking
. Figure 18.6 Stages in gene expression that can be regulated 
in eukaryotic cells. In this diagram, the colored boxes indicate 
the processes most often regulated; each color indicates the 
type of molecule that is affected (blue = DNA, red/orange = RNA, 
purple = protein). The nuclear envelope separating transcription from 
translation in eukaryotic cells allows for RNA processing, a form of post-
transcriptional control that is not possible in prokaryotes. Eukaryotes 
also have a greater variety of control mechanisms operating before 
transcription and after translation. Some genes are regulated at 
multiple stages. 
CONCEPT CHECK 18.1
1. How does binding of the trp corepressor to the trp repressor 
alter repressor function and transcription? How does bind-
ing of the lac inducer alter the function of the lac repressor?
2. Describe the binding of repressors and activators to the lac 
operon when both lactose and glucose are scarce. What is the 
effect of these scarcities on transcription of the lac operon?
3. WHAT IF? A certain mutation in E. coli changes the lac oper-
ator so that the active repressor cannot bind. How would this 
affect the cell’s production of /uni03B2-galactosidase?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 18.2
Eukaryotic gene expression  
is regulated at many stages
All organisms, whether prokaryotes or eukaryotes, must 
regulate which genes are expressed at any given time. Both 
unicellular organisms and the cells of multicellular organisms 
continually turn genes on and off in response to signals from 
their external and internal environments. Regulation of gene 
expression is also essential for cell specialization in multicel-
lular organisms, which are made up of different types of cells. 
To perform its own distinct role, each cell type must maintain 
a specific program of gene expression in which certain genes 
are expressed and others are not (see  Figure 18.1).
Differential Gene Expression
A typical human cell might express about a third to a half of 
its protein-coding genes at any given time. Highly differen-
tiated cells, such as muscle or nerve cells, express a smaller 
fraction of their genes. Almost all the cells in a multicellular 
organism contain an identical genome. (Cells of the immune 
system are one exception, as you will see in Figure 47.13.) 
A subset of genes is expressed in each cell type; some of 
these—about 35%—are “housekeeping” genes, expressed 
by many cell types, while others are unique to that cell type. 
The uniquely expressed genes allow these cells to carry out 
their specific function. The differences between cell types, 
therefore, are due not to different genes being present, but to 
differential gene expression, the expression of different 
genes by cells with the same genome.
The function of any cell depends on its expressing the 
appropriate set of genes. The transcription factors of a cell 
must locate the right genes at the right time, a task like find-
ing a needle in a haystack. Abnormal gene expression can 
cause serious imbalances and diseases, including cancer.
Figure 18.6 summarizes the process of gene expression in 
a eukaryotic cell, highlighting key stages in the expression 
of a protein-coding gene. Each stage depicted in Figure 18.6 
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Control of Gene Expression
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   420 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 422 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 421
Chromatin structure and gene expression can be influenced 
by chemical modifications of both the histone proteins of the 
nucleosomes around which DNA is wrapped and the nucleo-
tides that make up that DNA. Here we examine the effects of 
these modifications, which are catalyzed by specific enzymes.
Histone Modifications and DNA Methylation
Chemical modifications to histones, found in all eukaryotic 
organisms, play a direct role in the regulation of gene tran-
scription. The N-terminus of each histone protein in a nucleo-
some protrudes outward from the nucleosome (Figure 18.7a). 
These so-called histone tails are accessible to various modifying 
enzymes that catalyze the addition or removal of specific chem-
ical groups, such as acetyl (—COCH3), methyl, and phosphate 
groups (see Figure 4.9). Generally, histone acetylation—the 
addition of an acetyl group to an amino acid in a histone 
tail—appears to promote transcription by opening up chro-
matin structure (Figure 18.7b), while the addition of methyl 
groups to histones can lead to the condensation of chromatin 
and reduced transcription. Often, the addition of a particular 
chemical group may create a new binding site for enzymes that 
further modify chromatin structure.
Rather than modifying histone proteins, a different set 
of enzymes can methylate the DNA itself on certain bases, 
usually cytosine. Such DNA methylation occurs in most 
plants, animals, and fungi. Long stretches of inactive DNA, 
such as that of inactivated mammalian X chromosomes (see 
Figure 15.8), are generally more methylated than regions 
of actively transcribed DNA. On a smaller scale, the DNA of 
individual genes is usually more heavily methylated in cells 
in which those genes are not expressed. Removal of the extra 
methyl groups can turn on some of these genes.
is a potential control point at which gene expression can be 
turned on or off, accelerated, or slowed down. Many genes 
have more than one control point.
When the structure of DNA was determined in 1953, an 
understanding of the mechanisms that control gene expres-
sion in eukaryotes seemed almost hopelessly out of reach. 
Since then, advances in DNA technology (see Chapter 19) 
have enabled molecular biologists to uncover many details of 
eukaryotic gene regulation. In all organisms, gene expression 
is commonly controlled at transcription; regulation at this 
stage often occurs in response to signals coming from outside 
the cell, such as hormones or other signaling molecules. For 
this reason, the term gene expression is often equated with 
transcription for both bacteria and eukaryotes. While this 
may be the case for bacteria, the greater complexity of eukary-
otic cell structure and function provides opportunities for 
regulating gene expression at many stages besides transcrip-
tion (see Figure 18.6). Let’s examine some of the important 
control points of eukaryotic gene expression more closely.
Regulation of Chromatin Structure
Recall that the DNA of eukaryotic cells is packaged with pro-
teins in an elaborate complex known as chromatin, the basic 
unit of which is the nucleosome (see Figure 16.23). The struc-
tural organization of chromatin not only packs a cell’s DNA 
into a compact form that fits inside the nucleus, but also helps 
regulate gene expression in several ways. Genes within het-
erochromatin, which is more densely arranged than euchro-
matin, are usually not expressed. In euchromatin, whether or 
not a gene is transcribed is affected by the location of nucleo-
somes along a gene’s promoter and also the sites where the 
DNA attaches to the protein scaffolding of the chromosome. 
Histone
tails DNA double
helix
Amino acids
available
for chemical
modiƂcation
Nucleosome
(end view)
(a) Histone tails protrude outward from 
a nucleosome. The amino acids in the 
histone tails are accessible for chemical 
modiƂcation.
(b)Acetylation of histone tails promotes loose chromatin structure 
that permits transcription. A region of chromatin in which 
nucleosomes are unacetylated forms a more condensed arrangement 
of chromatin (left) in which the DNA is not transcribed. When 
nucleosomes become highly acetylated (right), the chromatin becomes 
less condensed, and the DNA is accessible for transcription.
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
DNA
DNA
Acetylated
histone tails
Unacetylated histone tails
Nucleosome
Compact: DNA not
accessible for transcription
Looser: DNA accessible
for transcription
Acetylation
. Figure 18.7 A simple model of histone tails and the effect of histone acetylation. 
Amino acids in histone tails may be chemically modified by addition of acetyl groups (green 
balls) or other groups (such as methyl or phosphate groups). Such modifications affect chromatin 
structure in a region, sometimes by providing binding sites for other chromatin-modifying enzymes.
 Mastering Biology HHMI  
Animation: Role of MECP2  
in Gene Silencing       
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   421 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 423 ===

422 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Once methylated, genes usually stay that way through 
successive cell divisions in a given individual. At DNA sites 
where one strand is already methylated, enzymes methylate 
the correct daughter strand after each round of DNA replica-
tion. Methylation patterns are thus passed on to daughter 
cells, and cells forming specialized tissues keep a chemical 
record of what occurred during embryonic development. A 
methylation pattern maintained in this way also accounts for 
genomic imprinting in mammals, where methylation perma-
nently regulates expression of either the maternal or paternal 
allele of particular genes at the start of development (see 
Figure 15.17). DNA methylation and histone modification are 
believed to be coordinated in their regulation.
Epigenetic Inheritance
The chromatin modifications that we just discussed do not 
change the DNA sequence, yet they still may be passed along 
to future generations of cells. Inheritance of traits transmitted 
by mechanisms not involving the nucleotide sequence itself 
is called epigenetic inheritance, the study of which is called 
epigenetics. Whereas mutations in the DNA are permanent 
changes, modifications to the chromatin can be reversed. For 
example, DNA methylation patterns are largely erased during 
gamete formation and reestablished during embryonic devel-
opment. Furthermore, they are changeable, thus responding 
more rapidly to environmental conditions.
Research on epigenetics has skyrocketed over the past 
20 years. The importance of epigenetic information in regu-
lating gene expression is now widely accepted. One key study 
by Robert Waterland and Randy Jirtle at Duke University, 
published in 2003, used a mouse mutant whose genome 
had been altered so that a gene called agouti that determines 
coat color, normally expressed only briefly during fur for-
mation, was instead expressed throughout development. 
This overexpression resulted in yellow mice (Figure 18.8a, 
left mouse) rather than the usual brownish (“agouti”) color. 
Previous work had shown that merely supplementing the diet 
of pregnant mothers with methyl group–containing com-
pounds (like folic acid) could shift the range of coat colors of 
the offspring back to normal (see Figure 18.8a, right mouse). 
Waterland and Jirtle reproduced this result, analyzing the 
state of methylation of the DNA. They showed that the extent 
of the color shift correlated with the level of DNA methyla-
tion. In other words, feeding methyl groups to the mothers at 
a key time during gestation led to a change in gene expression 
in the offspring’s phenotype. Further studies showed that 
the effects were even observed in the next generation—the 
“grandpups” of the original female mouse.
A similar epigenetic effect due to changes in methyla-
tion occurs in humans as well. Near the end of World War 
II, during the winter of 1944–45, Dutch railway workers 
went on strike to try to prevent the Nazis from bringing in 
more troops. In retaliation, the Nazis blocked all deliveries of 
food. Over 20,000 Dutch died in the “Dutch Hunger Winter” 
(a) Effects of maternal diet on genetically identical mice. These two 
mice are genetically identical (agouti mutants), but their mothers were 
fed different diets. A maternal diet without compounds that donate 
methyl groups resulted in the obese, yellow offspring on the left. A diet 
supplemented with methyl-donating compounds, such as folic acid, led 
to the speckled brown fur (normal agouti phenotype) and normal weight 
of the mouse on the right.                             
. Figure 18.8 Examples of epigenetic inheritance.
(b) The Dutch Hunger Winter. During the Nazi blockade of food 
transport into the Netherlands near the end of World War II, the 
population was starving, including this mother and her two children. 
Children of mothers who were pregnant during that time have 
experienced long-term effects.
(Figure 18.8b). Over time, doctors found that the offspring of 
women in early pregnancy at that time experienced adverse 
health effects as adults: higher rates of obesity, high triglyc-
eride and cholesterol levels, type 2 diabetes, and schizophre-
nia. Furthermore, the affected individuals had a 10% higher 
mortality rate after the age of 68 than their siblings who 
were in utero when food was readily available. A collabora-
tion between labs in the Netherlands and the United States 
compared those adults with their siblings and published their 
findings in 2018. Statistical analysis enabled the research-
ers to conclude that differences between the siblings in DNA 
methylation of certain genes caused these long-term adverse 
medical conditions—examples of epigenetic inheritance.
Epigenetic variations might help explain cases where one 
identical twin acquires a genetically based disease, such as 
schizophrenia, but the other does not, despite their identical 
genomes. Alterations in normal patterns of DNA methylation 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   422 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 424 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 423
One of these proteins, RNA polymerase II, then proceeds to 
transcribe the gene, synthesizing a primary RNA transcript 
(pre-mRNA). RNA processing includes enzymatic addition 
of a 5/uni2032 cap and a poly-A tail, as well as splicing out of introns, 
to yield a mature mRNA. Associated with most eukaryotic 
genes are multiple control elements, segments of noncod-
ing DNA that serve as binding sites for the proteins called 
transcription factors, which bind to the control elements and 
regulate transcription. Control elements on the DNA and the 
transcription factors that bind to them are critical to the pre-
cise regulation of gene expression seen in different cell types.
The Roles of General and Specific Transcription 
Factors
There are two types of transcription factors: General transcrip-
tion factors act at the promoter of all genes, while some genes 
require specific transcription factors that bind to control ele-
ments that may be close to or farther away from the promoter.
General Transcription Factors at the Promoter To initi-
ate transcription, eukaryotic RNA polymerase II requires the 
assistance of transcription factors. Some transcription factors 
(such as those illustrated in Figure 17.9) are essential for the 
transcription of all protein-coding genes; therefore, they are 
often called general transcription factors. A few general tran-
scription factors bind to a DNA sequence, such as the TATA 
box in most promoters, but many bind to proteins, including 
are seen in some cancers, where they are associated with inap-
propriate gene expression. Evidently, enzymes that modify 
chromatin structure are integral parts of the eukaryotic cell’s 
machinery for regulating transcription.
Regulation of Transcription Initiation
Chromatin-modifying enzymes provide initial control of 
gene expression by making a region of DNA either more 
or less able to bind the transcription machinery. Once the 
chromatin of a gene is optimally modified for expression, 
the initiation of transcription is the next major step at which 
gene expression is regulated. As in bacteria, the regulation of 
transcription initiation in eukaryotes involves proteins that 
bind to DNA and either facilitate or inhibit binding of RNA 
polymerase. The process is more complicated in eukaryotes, 
however. Before looking at how eukaryotic cells control their 
transcription, let’s review the structure of a eukaryotic gene.
Organization of a Typical Eukaryotic Gene  
and Its Transcript
A eukaryotic gene and the DNA elements (segments) that 
control it are typically organized as shown in Figure 18.9, 
which extends what you learned about eukaryotic genes 
in Chapter 17. Recall that a cluster of proteins called a 
transcription initiation complex assembles on the promoter 
sequence at the “upstream” end of the gene (see Figure 17.9). 
G
Coding segment
5¿ UTR
(untranslated
region)
Promoter
5¿ Cap
Stop
codon 3¿ UTR
(untranslated
region)
AAA...AAA
Poly-A
tail
Start
codon
RNA processing:
Cap and tail added;
introns removed and
exons spliced together
Transcription
5¿
Cleaved 3¿ end
of primary
transcript
3¿
DownstreamUpstream
Exon ExonIntron Exon Intron
Poly-A signal
sequence
Exon ExonIntron Exon Intron
Poly-A
signal
Transcription
termination
region
Transcription
start site
Proximal
control elements
Enhancer (group of 
distal control elements)
DNA
mRNA
Primary RNA
transcript
(pre-mRNA)
Intron RNA
PPP
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
. Figure 18.9 A eukaryotic gene and 
its transcript. Each eukaryotic gene has 
a promoter—a DNA sequence where RNA 
polymerase II binds and starts transcription, 
proceeding “downstream.” A number of control 
elements (gold) are involved in regulating 
the initiation of transcription; these are DNA 
sequences located near (proximal to) or far from 
(distal to) the promoter. Distal control elements 
can be grouped together as enhancers, one 
of which is shown for this gene. At the other 
end of the gene, a polyadenylation (poly-A) 
signal sequence in the last exon of the gene is 
transcribed into an RNA sequence that signals 
where the transcript is cleaved and the poly-A 
tail added. Transcription may continue for 
hundreds of nucleotides beyond the poly-A 
signal before terminating. RNA processing of 
the primary transcript into a functional mRNA 
involves three steps: addition of the 5/uni2032 cap, 
addition of the poly-A tail, and splicing. In the 
cell, the 5/uni2032 cap is added soon after transcription is 
initiated, and splicing occurs while transcrip tion 
is still under way (see Figures 17.11 and 17.12).
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   423 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 425 ===

424 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
other transcription factors as well as RNA polymerase II. 
Protein-protein interactions are crucial to the initiation of 
eukaryotic transcription. Only when the complete initiation 
complex has assembled can the polymerase begin to move 
along the DNA template strand and transcribe.
Some genes are expressed all the time, but others are not; 
instead, they are regulated. For these genes, the interaction 
of general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II with a 
promoter usually leads to a low rate of initiation and produc-
tion of few RNA transcripts from genes that are not expressed 
at significant levels all the time or in all cells. In eukaryotes, 
high levels of transcription of these particular genes at the 
appropriate time and place depend on the interaction of 
control elements with another set of proteins, which can be 
thought of as specific transcription factors.
Enhancers and Specific Transcription Factors As you can 
see in Figure 18.9, some control elements, named proximal 
control elements, are close to the promoter. The more distant 
distal control elements, groupings of which are called enhanc-
ers, may be thousands of nucleotides upstream or down-
stream of a gene or even within an intron. A given gene may 
have multiple enhancers, each active at a different time, cell 
type, or location in the organism. Each enhancer, however, is 
generally associated with only that gene and no other.
In eukaryotes, the rate of gene expression can be strongly 
increased or decreased by the binding of specific transcription 
factors, either activators or repressors, to the control elements 
of enhancers. Hundreds of transcription activators have been 
discovered in eukaryotes; the structure of one is shown in 
Figure 18.10. Researchers have identified two types of struc-
tural domains that are commonly found in a large number of 
transcription activators: a DNA-binding domain—a part of the 
protein’s three-dimensional structure that binds to DNA—
and one or more activation domains. Activation domains bind 
other regulatory proteins or components of the transcription 
machinery, facilitating a series of protein-protein interactions 
that result in enhanced transcription of a given gene.
Figure 18.11 shows the currently accepted model for how 
binding of activators to an enhancer located far from the pro-
moter influences transcription. Protein-mediated bending of 
the DNA brings the bound activators into contact with a group 
of mediator proteins, which in turn interact with general tran-
scription factors at the promoter. These protein-protein inter-
actions help assemble and position the initiation complex on 
the promoter. One of the studies supporting this model shows 
that proteins regulating one of the mouse globin genes con-
tact both the gene’s promoter and an enhancer located about 
50,000 nucleotides upstream. Protein interactions allow these 
two DNA regions to come together in a very specific fashion, 
in spite of the many nucleotide pairs between them.
Specific transcription factors that function as repressors 
can inhibit gene expression in several different ways. Some 
repressors bind directly to control element DNA (in enhancers 
Activation 
domain
DNA
DNA-binding
domain
. Figure 18.10 The structure of MyoD, a transcriptional 
activator. The MyoD protein is made up of two polypeptide 
subunits (purple and salmon) with extensive regions of /uni03B1 helix. 
Each subunit has one DNA-binding domain (lower half) and one 
activation domain (upper half). The latter includes binding sites for 
the other subunit and for other proteins. MyoD is involved in muscle 
development in vertebrate embryos (see Concept 18.4).
VISUAL SKILLS Describe how the two functional domains of the 
MyoD protein relate to the two polypeptide subunits.
or elsewhere), blocking activator binding. Other repressors 
interfere with the activator itself so it can’t bind the DNA.
In addition to influencing transcription directly, some 
activators and repressors indirectly affect chromatin struc-
ture. Studies using yeast and mammalian cells show that 
some activators recruit proteins that acetylate histones near 
the promoters of specific genes, thus promoting transcription 
(see Figure 18.7). Similarly, some repressors recruit proteins 
that remove acetyl groups from histones, leading to reduced 
transcription, a phenomenon referred to as silencing. Indeed, 
recruitment of chromatin-modifying proteins seems to be the 
most common mechanism of repression in eukaryotic cells.
 Mastering Biology H H M I  A n i m a t i o n :   
Regulation of Eukaryotic DNA Transcription 
Combinatorial Control of Gene Activation In eukaryotes, 
the precise control of transcription depends largely on the 
binding of activators to DNA control elements. Considering 
that many genes must be regulated in a typical animal or plant 
cell, the number of different nucleotide sequences in control 
elements is surprisingly small. A dozen or so short nucleotide 
sequences appear again and again in the control elements 
for different genes. On average, each enhancer is composed 
of about ten control elements, each binding only one or two 
specific transcription factors. It is the particular combination of 
control elements in an enhancer associated with a gene, rather 
than a single unique control element, that is important in 
regulating transcription of the gene.
Even with only a dozen control element sequences available, 
many combinations are possible. Each combination of control 
elements can activate transcription only when the appropriate 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   424 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 426 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 425
DNA Activators
Distal control
element
DNA-bending
protein
General
transcription
factors
Group of
mediator proteins 
RNA
polymerase II
RNA
polymerase II
Transcription initiation complex
RNA synthesis
Enhancer
Promoter
Gene
TATA
box
1     Activator proteins 
bind to distal control 
elements grouped as an 
enhancer in the DNA. 
This enhancer has three 
binding sites, each called
a distal control element.
2     A DNA-bending 
protein brings the 
bound activators closer 
to the promoter. 
General transcription 
factors, mediator 
proteins, and RNA 
polymerase II are nearby.  
3     The activators bind 
to certain mediator 
proteins and general 
transcription factors, 
helping them form an 
active transcription 
initiation complex on 
the promoter.
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
. Figure 18.11 A model for the action of 
enhancers and transcription activators. 
Bending of the DNA by a protein enables 
enhancers to influence a promoter hundreds 
or even thousands of nucleotides away. 
Specific transcription factors (activators) bind 
to the enhancer DNA sequences and then to 
a group of mediator proteins. These in turn 
bind to general transcription factors and 
then RNA polymerase II, thus assembling 
the transcription initiation complex. These 
protein-protein interactions lead to correct 
positioning of the complex on the promoter 
and the initiation of RNA synthesis. Only one 
enhancer (with three gold control elements) 
is shown here, but a gene may have several 
enhancers that act at different times or in 
different cell types.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Regulation of Transcription by Transcription Activators and Enhancers
transcription activators are present, which may occur at a 
precise time during development or in a particular cell type. 
In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can work with data from 
an experiment that identified the control elements in an 
enhancer of a particular human gene. Figure 18.12 illustrates 
how the use of different combinations of just a few control ele-
ments can allow differential regulation of transcription in two 
representative cell types—liver cells and lens cells. This can 
occur because each cell type contains a different group of tran-
scription activators. How cell types come to differ during this 
process, even though they all arise from one cell (the fertilized 
egg), will be explored in Concept 18.4.
Coordinately Controlled Genes in Eukaryotes
How does the eukaryotic cell deal with a group of genes of 
related function that need to be turned on or off at the same 
time? Earlier in this chapter, you learned that in bacteria, 
such coordinately controlled genes are often clustered into an 
operon, which is regulated by a single promoter and tran-
scribed into a single mRNA molecule. Thus, the genes are 
expressed together, and the encoded proteins are produced at 
the same time. With a few exceptions, operons that work in 
this way have not been found in eukaryotic cells.
Eukaryotic genes that are co-expressed, such as genes cod-
ing for the enzymes of a metabolic pathway, are typically 
scattered over different chromosomes. Here, coordinate gene 
expression depends on every gene of a dispersed group hav-
ing a specific combination of control elements. Transcription 
activators in the nucleus that recognize the control elements 
bind to them, promoting simultaneous transcription of the 
genes, no matter where they are in the genome.
Coordinate control of dispersed genes in a eukaryotic cell often 
occurs in response to chemical signals from outside the cell. A 
steroid hormone, for example, enters a cell and binds to a specific 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   425 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 427 ===

426 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
intracellular receptor protein, forming a hormone-receptor com-
plex that serves as a transcription activator (see Figure 9.9). Every 
gene whose transcription is stimulated by a given steroid hor-
mone, regardless of its chromosomal location, has a control ele-
ment recognized by that hormone-receptor complex. This is how 
estrogen activates a group of genes that stimulate cell division in 
uterine cells, preparing the uterus for pregnancy.
Many signaling molecules, such as nonsteroid hormones 
and growth factors, bind to receptors on a cell’s surface and 
never actually enter the cell. Such molecules can control 
gene expression indirectly by triggering signal transduction 
pathways that activate particular transcription factors (see 
Figure 9.15). Coordinate regulation in such pathways is the 
same as for steroid hormones: Genes with the same sets of 
control elements are activated by the same chemical signals. 
Because this system for coordinating gene regulation is so 
widespread, biologists think that it probably arose early in 
evolutionary history.
What Control Elements 
Regulate Expression of 
the mPGES-1 Gene? The 
promoter of a gene includes 
the DNA immediately up-
stream of the transcription 
start site, but the control 
elements (grouped in an 
enhancer) that regulate 
the level of transcription of 
the gene may be thousands 
of base pairs upstream of 
the promoter. Because the 
distance and spacing of con-
trol elements make them 
difficult to identify, scientists begin by deleting possible control 
elements and measuring the effect on gene expression. In this ex-
ercise, you will analyze data obtained from DNA deletion experi-
ments that tested possible control elements for the human gene 
mPGES-1. This gene codes for an enzyme that synthesizes a type 
of prostaglandin, a chemical made during tissue inflammation.
How the Experiment Was Done The researchers hypothesized 
that there were three possible control elements in an enhancer 
region located 8–9 kilobases (kb) upstream of the mPGES-1 gene. 
Control elements regulate whatever gene is in the appropriate 
downstream location. Thus, to test the activity of the possible 
elements, researchers first synthesized molecules of DNA (DNA 
constructs) that had the intact enhancer region upstream of 
a reporter gene, a gene whose mRNA product could be easily 
measured experimentally. Next, they made three more DNA 
constructs, with one of the three proposed control elements 
deleted in each (see the left side of the figure). The researchers 
then introduced each DNA construct into a separate human cell 
culture, where the cells took up the DNA. After 48 hours, the 
amount of reporter gene mRNA made by the cells was measured. 
Comparing these amounts allowed researchers to determine if 
any of the deletions had an effect on expression of the reporter 
gene, mimicking the effect of deletions on mPGES-1 gene expres-
sion. (The mPGES-1 gene itself couldn’t be used to measure ex-
pression levels because the cells express their own mPGES-1 gene, 
and the mRNA from that gene would confuse the results.)
Data from the Experiment The diagrams on the left side of 
the figure show the intact DNA sequence (top) and the three 
experimental DNA constructs. A red X is located on the possible 
control element (1, 2, or 3) that was deleted in each experimental 
DNA construct. The area between the slashes represents the ap-
proximately 8 kb of DNA located between the promoter and the 
enhancer region. The horizontal bar graph on the right shows 
Analyzing DNA Deletion Experiments
the amount of reporter gene mRNA that was present in each cell 
culture after 48 hours relative to the amount that was in the culture 
containing the intact enhancer region (top bar = 100%).
Scientific Skills Exercise
0 100 50150
Relative level of reporter
mRNA (% of control)
200
Enhancer with possible 
control elements
Promoter12 3
Reporter
gene
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. (a) What is the independent variable in the graph? (b) What is the 
dependent variable? (c) What was the control treatment in this 
experiment? Label it on the diagram.
2. Do the data suggest that any of these possible control elements are 
actual control elements? Explain.
3. (a) Did deletion of any of the possible control elements cause a re-
duction in reporter gene expression? If so, which one(s), and how can 
you tell? (b) If loss of a control element causes a reduction in gene 
expression, what must be the normal role of that control element? 
Provide a biological explanation for how the loss of such a control 
element could lead to a reduction in gene expression.
4. (a) Did deletion of any of the possible control elements cause an 
increase in reporter gene expression relative to the control? If so, 
which one(s), and how can you tell? (b) If loss of a control element 
causes an increase in gene expression, what must be the normal 
role of that control element? Propose a biological explanation for 
how the loss of such a control element could lead to an increase in 
gene expression.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be  
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Data from J. N. Walters et al., Regulation of human microsomal prostaglandin E 
synthase-1 by IL-1b requires a distal enhancer element with a unique role for C/EBPb, 
Biochemical Journal 443:561–571 (2012).
m Tissue inflammation
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   426 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 428 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 427
movements of chromatin. Several lines of evidence suggest 
that unexpressed genes are located in the outer edges of the 
nucleus, while those that are being expressed are found in its 
interior region. Relocation of particular genes from their chro-
mosomal territories to transcription factories in the interior 
may be part of the process of readying genes for transcription. 
In 2017, a consortium of researchers funded by the National 
Institutes of Health began investigating genome organization 
over time and its relationship to genome function.
Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional 
Regulation
Transcription alone does not constitute gene expression. The 
expression of a protein-coding gene is ultimately measured 
by the amount of functional protein a cell makes, and much 
happens between the synthesis of the RNA transcript and the 
activity of the protein in the cell. Many regulatory mecha-
nisms operate at the various stages after transcription (see 
Figure 18.6). These mechanisms allow a cell to rapidly fine-
tune gene expression in response to environmental changes 
without altering its transcription patterns. Here we explore 
how cells regulate gene expression after transcription.
Nuclear Architecture and Gene Expression
Each chromosome in the interphase nucleus of animal cells 
occupies a distinct territory (see Figure 16.24a). Recently, 
chromosome conformation capture techniques (3C and others) 
have been developed that allow researchers to cross-link and 
identify regions of chromosomes associating with each other 
during interphase. These studies reveal two organizational 
details: First, the territory of each chromosome is divided 
into regions of chromatin loops (topologically associated 
domains, or TADs), within which chromatin sites associ-
ate mainly with each other. Second, loops of chromatin, 
each likely a TAD, extend from individual chromosomal 
territories into specific sites in the nucleus (Figure 18.13). 
Different loops from the same chromosome and loops from 
other chromosomes may congregate in such sites, some of 
which are rich in RNA polymerases and other transcription-
associated proteins. Like a recreation center that draws mem-
bers from many different neighborhoods, these so-called 
transcription factories are thought to be areas specialized for a 
common function.
The old view that the nuclear contents are like a bowl of 
amorphous chromosomal spaghetti has given way to a new 
model of a nucleus with a defined architecture and regulated 
Available
activators
Available
activators
Albumin gene not expressed
Albumin gene
expressed
Crystallin gene not expressed
Albumin gene
Enhancer for
albumin gene
Control
elements
Promoter
Crystallin gene
Enhancer for
crystallin gene Promoter
Lens cell
nucleus
Crystallin gene
expressed
Liver cell
Liver cell
nucleus
Lens cell
c DNA in both 
cells              
(activators        
not shown)
. DNA in liver cell, showing 
available activators. The 
albumin gene is expressed, 
but the crystallin gene is not.
. DNA in lens cell, showing 
available activators. The 
crystallin gene is expressed, 
but the albumin gene is not.
c Figure 18.12 Cell type–specific 
transcription. Both liver cells and lens 
cells have the genes for making the 
proteins albumin and crystallin, but only 
liver cells make albumin (a blood protein) 
and only lens cells make crystallin (the 
main protein of the lens of the eye). The 
specific transcription factors made in a 
cell determine which genes are expressed. 
In this example, the genes for albumin 
and crystallin are shown at the top, each 
with an enhancer made up of three 
different control elements. Although the 
enhancers for the two genes both have a 
gray control element, each enhancer has 
a unique combination of elements. All 
the activator proteins required for high-
level expression of the albumin gene are 
present in liver cells only (left), whereas 
the activators needed for expression of 
the crystallin gene are present in lens cells 
only (right). For simplicity, we consider 
only the role of specific transcription 
factors that are activators here, 
although repressors may also influence 
transcription in certain cell types.
VISUAL SKILLS Describe the enhancer 
for the albumin gene in each type of cell. 
How would the nucleotide sequence of this 
enhancer in the liver cell compare with that 
in the lens cell?
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   427 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 429 ===

428 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Alternative RNA splicing can significantly expand the 
repertoire of a eukaryotic genome. In fact, alternative splic-
ing was proposed as one explanation for the surprisingly low 
number of human genes counted when the human genome 
was sequenced. The number of human genes was found to be 
similar to that of a soil worm (nematode), a mustard plant, 
or a sea anemone. This discovery prompted questions about 
what, if not the number of genes, accounts for the more com-
plex form and structure of humans. More than 90% of human 
protein-coding genes likely undergo alternative splicing. 
Thus, the extent of alternative splicing greatly multiplies the 
number of possible human proteins, which may be better cor-
related with complexity of form than the number of genes.
Initiation of Translation and mRNA Degradation
Translation is another stage where gene expression is 
regulated, most commonly at the initiation stage (see  
Figure 17.19). For some mRNAs, the initiation of translation 
can be blocked by regulatory proteins that bind to specific 
sequences or structures within the untranslated region 
(UTR) at the 5/uni2032 or 3/uni2032 end, preventing the attachment of ribo-
somes. (Recall from Concept 17.3 that both the 5/uni2032 cap and 
the poly-A tail of an mRNA molecule are important for ribo-
some binding.)
Alternatively, translation of all the mRNAs in a cell 
may be regulated simultaneously. In a eukaryotic cell, 
such “global” control usually involves the activation or 
inactivation of one or more protein factors required to 
initiate translation. This mechanism plays a role in start -
ing translation of mRNAs that are stored in eggs. Just after 
RNA Processing
RNA processing in the nucleus and the export of mature RNA 
to the cytoplasm provide opportunities for regulating gene 
expression not available in prokaryotes. One example of 
regulation at the RNA-processing level is alternative RNA 
splicing, in which different mRNA molecules are produced 
from the same primary transcript, depending on which 
RNA segments are treated as exons and which as introns. 
Regulatory proteins specific to a cell type control intron/exon 
choices by binding to regulatory sequences within the pri-
mary transcript.
A simple example of alternative RNA splicing is shown in 
Figure 18.14 for the troponin T gene, which encodes multiple 
closely related proteins with slightly different effects on muscle 
contraction. Other genes code for many more products. For 
instance, researchers have found a Drosophila gene with enough 
alternatively spliced exons to generate about 19,000 membrane 
proteins that have different extracellular domains. At least 
17,500 (94%) of the alternative mRNAs are actually synthesized. 
Each developing nerve cell in the fly appears to synthesize a 
different form of the protein, which acts as a unique identifier 
on the cell surface and helps prevent excessive overlap of nerve 
cells during development of the nervous system.
Chromosomes in the
interphase nucleus 

ﬂWorescence micrograph)
Chromosome
territory
Transcription
factory
Chromatin
loop
5 om
. Figure 18.13 Chromosomal interactions in the interphase 
nucleus. Although each chromosome has its own territory (see 
Figure 16.24a), loops of chromatin may extend into other sites in 
the nucleus. (Each loop may be a topologically associated domain, 
or TAD.) Some of these sites are transcription factories that are 
occupied by multiple chromatin loops from the same chromosome 
(blue loops) or other chromosomes (red and green loops).
Primary
RNA
transcript
RNA splicing
DNA 12 3 4 5
1
12 3 5 124 5
23 4 5
mRNA
Exons
Troponin T gene
OR
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
. Figure 18.14 Alternative RNA 
splicing of the troponin T gene. 
The primary transcript of this gene 
can be spliced in more than one 
way, generating different mRNA 
molecules. Notice that one mRNA 
molecule has ended up with exon 
3 (green) and the other with exon 
4 (purple). These two mRNAs are 
translated into different but related 
muscle proteins.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   428 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 430 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 429
fertilization, translation is triggered by the sudden acti -
vation of translation initiation factors. The response is a 
burst of synthesis of the proteins encoded by the stored 
mRNAs. Some plants and algae store mRNAs during peri-
ods of darkness; light then triggers the reactivation of the 
translational apparatus.
The life span of mRNA molecules in the cytoplasm is impor-
tant in determining the pattern of protein synthesis in a cell. 
Bacterial mRNA molecules typically are degraded by enzymes 
within a few minutes. This short life span of mRNAs is one 
reason bacteria can change their patterns of protein synthesis 
so quickly in response to environmental changes. In contrast, 
some mRNAs in multicellular eukaryotes typically survive for 
hours, days, or even weeks. For instance, the mRNAs for the 
hemoglobin polypeptides (/uni03B1-globin and /uni03B2-globin) in develop-
ing red blood cells are unusually stable, and these long-lived 
mRNAs are translated repeatedly in red blood cells.
Nucleotide sequences that affect how long an mRNA 
remains intact are often found in the untranslated region at 
the 3/uni2032 end of the molecule (see Figure 18.9). In one experi-
ment, researchers transferred such a sequence from the short-
lived mRNA for a growth factor to the 3/uni2032 end of a normally 
stable globin mRNA. The globin mRNA was quickly degraded.
Other mechanisms that degrade or block expression of 
mRNA molecules have come to light. They involve a group of 
recently discovered RNA molecules that regulate gene expres-
sion at several levels, as you’ll see shortly.
Protein Processing and Degradation
The final opportunities for controlling gene expression occur 
after translation. Often, eukaryotic polypeptides must be 
processed to yield functional protein molecules. For instance, 
cleavage of the initial insulin polypeptide (pro-insulin) 
forms the active hormone. In addition, many proteins 
undergo chemical modifications that make them functional. 
Regulatory proteins are commonly activated or inacti-
vated by the reversible addition of phosphate groups (see 
Figure 9.10), and proteins destined for the surface of animal 
cells acquire sugars (see Figure 7.12). Cell-surface proteins and 
many others must also be transported to target destinations 
in the cell in order to function (see Figure 17.22). Regulation 
might occur at any of the steps involved in modifying or 
transporting a protein.
Finally, the length of time each protein functions in the 
cell is strictly regulated by selective degradation. Many pro-
teins, such as the cyclins involved in regulating the cell cycle, 
must be relatively short-lived if the cell is to function appro-
priately (see Figure 12.16). To mark a protein for destruction, 
the cell commonly attaches molecules of a small protein 
called ubiquitin to the protein. Giant protein complexes 
called proteasomes then recognize the ubiquitin tagged pro-
teins and degrade them.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Post-Transcriptional Control Mechanisms
CONCEPT CHECK 18.2
1. In general, what are the effects of histone acetylation and 
DNA methylation on gene expression?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Speculate about whether the same 
enzyme could methylate both a histone and a DNA base. 
(See Concept 6.4.)
3. Describe three mechanisms by which repressors can inhibit 
eukaryotic gene expression.
4. Once mRNA encoding a particular protein reaches the 
cytoplasm, what are four mechanisms that can regulate the 
amount of the protein that is active in the cell?
5. WHAT IF? Suppose you compared the nucleotide sequences 
of the distal control elements in the enhancers of three genes 
that are expressed only in muscle cells. What would you 
expect to find? Why?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 18.3
Noncoding RNAs play multiple 
roles in controlling gene 
expression
Genome sequencing has revealed that protein-coding DNA 
accounts for only 1.5% of the human genome and a similarly 
small percentage of the genomes of many other multicellular 
eukaryotes. A very small fraction of the non-protein-coding 
DNA consists of genes for RNAs such as ribosomal RNA and 
transfer RNA. Until recently, scientists assumed that most of 
the remaining DNA was not transcribed, thinking that since 
it didn’t specify proteins or the few known types of RNA, such 
DNA didn’t contain meaningful genetic information—in fact, 
it was called “junk DNA.” However, some genomic studies have 
cast doubt on this description. For example, a massive study 
showed that roughly 75% of the human genome is transcribed 
at some point in any given cell. Introns account for only a frac-
tion of this transcribed RNA, most of which is untranslated. The 
verdict is still out on how much of the transcribed RNA is func-
tional, but at least some of the genome is transcribed into non-
protein-coding RNAs (also called noncoding RNAs, or ncRNAs), 
including a variety of small RNAs. Researchers are uncovering 
more evidence of the biological roles of these ncRNAs every day.
These discoveries have revealed a large and diverse popu-
lation of RNA molecules in the cell that play crucial roles in 
regulating gene expression and have gone largely unnoticed 
until recently. The longstanding view that mRNAs are the most 
important RNAs because they code for proteins needs revision. 
This represents a major shift in thinking by biologists, one that 
you are witnessing as students entering this field of study.
Effects on mRNAs by MicroRNAs and Small 
Interfering RNAs
Regulation by both small and large ncRNAs occurs at several 
points in the pathway of gene expression, including mRNA 
translation and chromatin modification. We’ll examine 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   429 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 431 ===

430 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(siRNAs). Both miRNAs and siRNAs can associate with the 
same proteins, producing similar results. In fact, if siRNA pre-
cursor RNA molecules are injected into a cell, the cell’s machin-
ery can process them into siRNAs that turn off expression of 
genes with related sequences, similarly to how miRNAs func-
tion. The distinction between miRNAs and siRNAs is based on 
subtle differences in the structure of their precursors, which in 
both cases are RNA molecules that are mostly double-stranded. 
The blocking of gene expression by siRNAs, referred to as RNA 
interference (RNAi), is used in the laboratory as a means of 
disabling specific genes to investigate their function.
EVOLUTION H o w  d i d  t h e  R N A i  p a t h w a y  e v o l v e ?  As 
you will learn in Concept 26.2, some viruses have double-
stranded RNA genomes. Given that the cellular RNAi 
pathway can process double-stranded RNAs into homing 
devices that lead to destruction of related RNAs, some scien-
tists think that this pathway may have evolved as a natural 
defense against infection by such viruses. However, the fact 
that RNAi can also affect the expression of nonviral cellular 
genes may reflect a different evolutionary origin for the 
RNAi pathway.
While this section has focused on ncRNAs in eukaryotes, 
small ncRNAs are also used by bacteria as a defense system, 
called the CRISPR-Cas9 system, against viruses that infect 
them (see Concept 17.5). The use of ncRNAs thus evolved 
long ago, but we don’t yet know how bacterial ncRNAs are 
related to those of eukaryotes.
Chromatin Remodeling and Effects  
on Transcription by ncRNAs
In addition to regulating mRNAs, small noncoding RNAs can 
cause remodeling of chromatin structure. In the S phase of 
the cell cycle, for example, the centromeric regions of DNA 
must be loosened for chromosomal replication and then re-
condensed into heterochromatin in preparation for mitosis. In 
some yeasts, siRNAs produced by the yeast cells from the cen-
tromeric DNA are required to re-form the heterochromatin at 
the centromeres. Exactly how the process starts is still debated, 
but biologists agree on the general idea: The siRNA system in 
yeast interacts with other, larger noncoding RNAs and with 
chromatin-modifying enzymes to condense the centromere 
chromatin into heterochromatin. In most mammalian cells, 
siRNAs have not been found, and the mechanism for centro-
mere DNA condensation is not yet understood. However, it 
may also turn out to involve small noncoding RNAs.
A recently discovered class of small ncRNAs called 
piwi-interacting RNAs, or piRNAs, also induces formation of 
heterochromatin, blocking expression of some parasitic DNA 
elements in the genome known as transposons. (Transposons 
are discussed in Concept 20.4.) Usually 24–31 nucleotides in 
length, piRNAs are processed from a longer, single-stranded 
RNA precursor. They play an indispensable role in the germ 
two types of small ncRNAs, the importance of which was 
acknowledged when their discovery was the focus of the 2006 
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, which was awarded 
for work completed only eight years earlier.
Since 1993, a number of research studies have uncovered 
microRNAs (miRNAs)—small, single-stranded RNA mol-
ecules capable of binding to complementary sequences in 
mRNA molecules. A longer RNA precursor is processed by 
cellular enzymes into an miRNA, a single-stranded RNA of 
about 22 nucleotides that forms a complex with one or more 
proteins (Figure 18.15). The miRNA allows the complex 
to bind to any mRNA molecule with at least seven or eight 
nucleotides of complementary sequence. The miRNA-protein 
complex then degrades the target mRNA or, less often, simply 
blocks its translation. There are approximately 1,500 genes 
for miRNAs in the human genome, and biologists estimate 
that expression of at least one-half of all human genes may be 
regulated by miRNAs, a remarkable figure given that the exis-
tence of miRNAs was unknown until the early 1990s.
Another class of small noncoding RNAs, similar in size 
and function to miRNAs, is called small interfering RNAs 
miRNA-
protein
complex
OR
mRNA degraded Translation blocked
miRNA
mRNA
The miRNA binds to a target 
mRNA with at least 7 
complementary bases.
1
If miRNA and mRNA bases are complementary all along their 
length, the mRNA is degraded (left); if the match is less 
complete, translation is blocked (right).
2
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
. Figure 18.15 Regulation of gene expression by 
microRNAs (miRNAs). An miRNA of about 22 nucleotides, 
formed by enzymatic processing of an RNA precursor, associates 
with one or more proteins in a complex that can degrade or block 
translation of target mRNAs.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   430 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 432 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 431
A program of differential gene 
expression leads to the different cell 
types in a multicellular organism
In the embryonic development of multicellular organisms, 
a fertilized egg (a zygote) gives rise to cells of many different 
types, each with a different structure and corresponding func-
tion. Typically, cells are organized into tissues, tissues into 
organs, organs into organ systems, and organ systems into 
the whole organism. Thus, any developmental program must 
produce cells of different types that form higher-level struc-
tures arranged in a particular way in three dimensions. The 
processes that occur during animal development are detailed 
in Chapter 46; in this chapter, we focus on the program of 
regulation of gene expression that orchestrates development, 
using a few animal species as examples.
A Genetic Program for Embryonic 
Development
The photos in Figure 18.16 illustrate the dramatic differ-
ence between a frog zygote (fertilized egg) and the tadpole 
it becomes. This remarkable transformation results from 
three interrelated processes: cell division, cell differentia-
tion, and morphogenesis. Through a succession of mitotic 
cell divisions, the zygote gives rise to a large number of 
cells. Cell division alone, however, would merely pro-
duce a great ball of identical cells, nothing like a tadpole. 
During embryonic development, cells not only increase 
in number, but also undergo cell differentiation, the 
process by which cells become specialized in structure and 
function. Moreover, the different kinds of cells are not 
cells of many animal species, where they appear to help 
reestablish appropriate methylation patterns in the genome 
 during gamete formation.
Researchers have also found a relatively large number of 
long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), ranging from 200 to 
hundreds of thousands of nucleotides in length, that are 
expressed at significant levels in specific cell types at particu-
lar times. The functional significance of these lncRNAs has 
been debated, but in 2017 a large international research con-
sortium published an atlas of almost 28,000 such RNAs; their 
analysis supported the idea that almost 20,000 were func-
tional and that some were associated with specific diseases. 
One lncRNA, long known to be functional, is responsible 
for X chromosome inactivation, which prevents expres-
sion of genes located on one of the X chromosomes in most 
female mammals (see Figure 15.8). In this case, lncRNAs—
transcripts of the XIST gene located on the chromosome to be 
inactivated—bind back to and coat that chromosome. This 
binding leads to condensation of the entire chromosome into 
heterochromatin.
The examples just described involve chromatin remod -
eling in large regions of the chromosome. Because chro -
matin structure affects transcription and thus gene expres -
sion, RNA-based regulation of chromatin structure is sure 
to play an important role in gene regulation. Additionally, 
some experimental evidence supports the idea of an alter -
nate role for lncRNAs in which they can act as a scaffold, 
bringing DNA, proteins, and other RNAs together into 
complexes. These associations may act either to condense 
chromatin or, in some cases, to help bring the enhancer 
of a gene together with mediator proteins and the gene’s 
promoter, activating gene expression in a more direct 
fashion.
Given the extensive functions of noncoding RNAs, it is 
not surprising that many of the ncRNAs characterized thus 
far play important roles in embryonic development—the 
topic we turn to in the next section. Embryonic development 
is perhaps the ultimate example of precisely regulated gene 
expression.
(a)Fertilized eggs of a frog (b)Newly hatched tadpole
1 mm 2 mm
. Figure 18.16 From fertilized egg to animal: What a 
difference four days makes. It takes just four days for cell 
division, differentiation, and morphogenesis to transform each 
of the fertilized frog eggs shown in (a) into a tadpole like the 
one in (b).
CONCEPT CHECK 18.3
1. Compare miRNAs and siRNAs, including their functions.
2. WHAT IF? Suppose the mRNA being degraded in Figure 18.14 
coded for a protein that promotes cell division in a multicellular 
organism. What would happen if a mutation disabled the gene 
for the miRNA that triggers this degradation?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Inactivation of one of the X chromo-
somes in female mammals involves a noncoding RNA (XIST). 
Suggest a model for how XIST RNA initiates Barr body forma-
tion (see Concept 15.2).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 18.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   431 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 433 ===

432 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
many species. Maternal substances in the egg that influence 
the course of early development are called cytoplasmic 
determinants (Figure 18.17a). After fertilization, early 
mitotic divisions distribute the zygote’s cytoplasm into sepa-
rate cells. The nuclei of these cells may thus be exposed to 
different cytoplasmic determinants, depending on which 
portions of the zygotic cytoplasm a cell received. The combi-
nation of cytoplasmic determinants in a cell helps determine 
its developmental fate by regulating expression of the cell’s 
genes during the course of cell differentiation.
randomly distributed but are organized into tissues and 
organs in a particular three-dimensional arrangement. The 
physical processes that give an organism its shape consti-
tute morphogenesis, the development of the form of an 
organism and its structures.
All three processes are rooted in cellular behavior. Even 
morphogenesis, the shaping of the organism, can be traced 
back to changes in the shape, motility, and other character-
istics of the cells that make up various regions of the embryo. 
As you have seen, the activities of a cell depend on the genes 
it expresses and the proteins it produces. Almost all cells in an 
organism have the same genome; therefore, differential gene 
expression results from the genes being regulated differently 
in each cell type.
In Figure 18.12, you saw a simplified view of how differ-
ential gene expression occurs in two cell types, a liver cell 
and a lens cell. Each of these fully differentiated cells has a 
particular mix of specific transcription factor activators that 
turn on the collection of genes whose products are required 
in the cell. The fact that both cells arose through a series of 
mitoses from a common fertilized egg inevitably leads to 
a question: How do different sets of activators come to be 
present in the two cells?
It turns out that materials placed into the egg by mater-
nal cells set up a sequential program of gene regulation 
that is carried out as embryonic cells divide, and this pro-
gram coordinates cell differentiation during embryonic 
development. To understand how this works, we will 
consider two basic developmental processes. First, we’ll 
explore how cells that arise from early embryonic mitoses 
develop the differences that start each cell along its own 
differentiation pathway. Second, we’ll see how cellular dif-
ferentiation leads to one particular cell type, using muscle 
development as an example.
Cytoplasmic Determinants and Inductive 
Signals
What generates the first differences among cells in an early 
embryo? And what controls the differentiation of all the vari-
ous cell types as development proceeds? You can probably 
deduce the answer: The specific genes expressed in any par-
ticular cell of a developing organism determine its path. Two 
sources of information, used to varying extents in different 
species, “tell” a cell which genes to express at any given time 
during embryonic development.
One important source of information early in develop-
ment is the egg’s cytoplasm, which contains both RNA and 
proteins encoded by the mother’s DNA. The cytoplasm of 
an unfertilized egg is not homogeneous. Messenger RNAs, 
proteins, other substances, and organelles are distributed 
unevenly in the unfertilized egg, and this unevenness has a 
profound impact on the development of the future embryo in 
The unfertilized egg has molecules in its cytoplasm, encoded by the 
mother’s genes, that inﬂuence developOent /any of these 
cytoplasmic determinants, like the two shown here, are unevenly 
distributed in the egg #fter fertili\ation and Oitotic division, the 
cell nuclei of the embryo are exposed to different combinations of 
cytoplasmic determinants and, as a result, express different genes 
Cells in the lowest tier of cells are releasing molecules that signal 
(induce) nearby cells to change their gene expression
Fertilization
Sperm
/itotic 
cell 
division
Unfertilized 
egg
Nucleus
/olecules of two different 
cytoplasmic determinants
Zygote
(fertilized egg)
Two-celled
embryo
Signal
transduction
pathway
Early embryo
(32 cells)
Signal
receptor
Signaling
molecule
(a) Cytoplasmic determinants in the egg
(b) Induction by nearby cells
NUCLEUS
. Figure 18.17 Sources of developmental information  
for the early embryo.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   432 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 434 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 433
example. Each of these cells is a long fiber containing 
many nuclei within a single plasma membrane. Skeletal 
muscle cells have high concentrations of muscle-specific 
versions of the contractile proteins myosin and actin, as 
well as membrane receptor proteins that detect signals 
from nerve cells.
Muscle cells develop from embryonic precursor cells 
that have the potential to develop into a number of cell 
types, including cartilage cells and fat cells, but particu-
lar conditions commit them to becoming muscle cells. 
Although the committed cells appear unchanged under the 
microscope, determination has occurred, and they are now 
a cell type called myoblasts. Eventually, myoblasts start to 
churn out large amounts of muscle-specific proteins and 
fuse to form mature, elongated, multinucleate skeletal 
muscle cells.
Researchers have worked out what happens at the molecu-
lar level during muscle cell determination. To do so, they 
grew embryonic precursor cells in culture and analyzed 
them using molecular techniques you will learn about in 
Concepts 19.1 and 19.2. In a series of experiments, they 
isolated different genes, caused each to be expressed in a 
separate embryonic precursor cell, and then looked for differ-
entiation into myoblasts and muscle cells. In this way, they 
identified several so-called “master regulatory genes” whose 
protein products commit the cells to becoming skeletal mus-
cle cells. Thus, in the case of muscle cells, the molecular basis 
of determination is the expression of one or more of these 
master regulatory genes.
To understand more about how determination occurs in 
muscle cell differentiation, let’s focus on the master regula-
tory gene called myoD. The myoD gene deserves its designa-
tion as a master regulatory gene. Researchers have shown 
that the MyoD protein it encodes is capable of changing 
some kinds of fully differentiated nonmuscle cells, such as 
fat cells and liver cells, into muscle cells. Why doesn’t MyoD 
work on all kinds of cells? One likely explanation is that 
activation of muscle-specific genes is not solely dependent 
on MyoD but requires a particular combination of regula-
tory proteins, some of which are lacking in cells that do not 
respond to MyoD.
What is the molecular basis for muscle cell differen-
tiation? The MyoD protein is a transcription factor (see 
Figure 18.10) that binds to specific control elements in 
the enhancers of various target genes and stimulates their 
expression (Figure 18.18). Some target genes for MyoD 
encode still other muscle-specific transcription factors. 
MyoD also stimulates expression of the myoD gene itself, an 
example of positive feedback that perpetuates MyoD’s effect 
in maintaining the cell’s differentiated state. Presumably, 
all the genes activated by MyoD have enhancer control ele-
ments recognized by MyoD and are thus coordinately con-
trolled. Finally, the secondary transcription factors activate 
The other major source of developmental information, 
which becomes increasingly important as the number of 
embryonic cells increases, is the environment around a 
particular cell. Most influential are the signals conveyed 
to an embryonic cell from other embryonic cells in the 
vicinity, including contact with cell-surface molecules 
on neighboring cells and the binding of growth factors 
secreted by neighboring cells (see Concept 9.1). Such 
signals cause changes in the target cells, a process called 
induction (Figure 18.17b). The molecules that transmit 
these signals within the target cell are cell-surface recep -
tors and other signaling pathway proteins. In general, the 
signal sends a cell down a specific developmental path 
by causing changes in its gene expression that lead to 
observable cellular changes. Thus, interactions between 
embryonic cells help induce differentiation into the many 
specialized cell types making up a new organism.
Sequential Regulation of Gene Expression 
During Cellular Differentiation
The earliest changes that set a cell on its path to specializa-
tion are subtle ones, showing up only at the molecular level. 
Before biologists knew much about the molecular changes 
occurring in embryos, they coined the term determination 
to refer to the point at which an embryonic cell is irreversibly 
committed to becoming a particular cell type. Once it has 
undergone determination, an embryonic cell can be experi-
mentally placed in another location in the embryo and it 
will still differentiate into the cell type that is its normal fate. 
Differentiation, then, is the process by which a cell attains 
its determined fate. As the tissues and organs of an embryo 
develop and their cells differentiate, the cells become more 
noticeably different in structure and function.
Today we understand determination in terms of molecular 
changes that result in observable cell differentiation, marked 
by the expression of genes for tissue-specific proteins. Such pro-
teins are found only in a specific cell type and give the cell its 
characteristic structure and function. The first sign of differ-
entiation is the appearance of mRNAs for tissue-specific pro-
teins. Later, differentiation is observable with a microscope as 
changes in cellular structure. On the molecular level, different 
sets of genes are sequentially expressed in a regulated manner 
as new cells arise when their precursors divide. Multiple steps 
in gene expression may be regulated during differentiation, 
transcription being the most common. In the fully differenti-
ated cell, transcription remains the principal regulatory point 
for maintaining appropriate gene expression.
Differentiated cells are specialists at making tissue-
specific proteins. For example, as a result of transcriptional 
regulation, liver cells specialize in making albumin, and 
lens cells specialize in making crystallin (see Figure 18.12). 
Skeletal muscle cells in vertebrates are another instructive 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   433 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 435 ===

434 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
organism in their characteristic places. This developmental 
process is referred to as pattern formation.
Just as the locations of the front, back, and sides of a new 
building are determined before construction begins, pattern 
formation in animals begins in the early embryo, when 
the major axes of an animal are established. In a bilaterally 
symmetrical animal, the relative positions of head and tail, 
right and left sides, and back and front—the three major 
body axes—are set up before the organs appear. The molecu-
lar cues that control pattern formation, collectively called 
positional information, are provided by cytoplasmic 
determinants and inductive signals (see Figure 18.17). These 
cues tell a cell its location relative to the body axes and to 
neighboring cells, and determine how the cell and its descen-
dants will respond to future molecular signals.
During the early 20th century, classical embryologists 
made detailed anatomical observations of embryonic devel-
opment in a number of species and performed experiments 
in which they manipulated embryonic tissues. Although 
this research laid the groundwork for understanding the 
mechanisms of development, it did not reveal the specific 
the genes for proteins such as myosin and actin that confer 
the unique properties of skeletal muscle cells.
The determination and differentiation of other kinds 
of tissues may play out in a similar fashion. Experimental 
results support the idea that master regulatory proteins like 
MyoD might function by opening the chromatin in certain 
regions. This allows access to transcription machinery for 
activation of the next set of cell-type-specific genes.
Pattern Formation: Setting Up the Body Plan
We have now seen how different programs of gene expression 
that are activated in the fertilized egg can result in differenti-
ated cells and tissues. But for the tissues to function effectively 
in the organism as a whole, the organism’s body plan—its over-
all three-dimensional arrangement—must be established and 
superimposed on the differentiation process. Let’s look at the 
molecular basis for the establishment of the body plan, using 
the well-studied fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as an example.
Cytoplasmic determinants and inductive signals both 
contribute to spatially organizing the tissues and organs of an 
Embryonic
precursor cell
Nucleus Other muscle-speciƂc genesMaster regulatory gene myoD
Myoblast

deterOined
2CTVoHCOWUENGƂDGT

fully differentiated cell
OFF OFF
mRNA
/yo& protein

transcription factor
OFF
mRNA
&0#
/yo&
mRNA mRNA mRNA
A different
transcription factor
/yosin, other 
muscle proteins, 
and proteins that 
block the cell cycle
1Determination. 5ignals froO 
other cells lead to activation 
of a Oaster regulatory gene 
called myoD, and the cell 
Oakes /yo& protein, a 
speciƂc transcription factor 
activator 6he cell, now called 
a Oyoblast, is irreversibly 
coOOitted to becoOing a 
skeletal muscle cell.
2Differentiation. /yo& 
protein stiOulates the myoD 
gene further and activates 
genes encoding other 
muscle-speciƂc transcription 
factors, which in turn 
activate genes for Ouscle 
proteins /yo& also turns 
on genes that block the cell 
cycle, thus stopping cell 
division 6he nondividing 
Oyoblasts fuse to becoOe  
mature Oultinucleate 
Ouscle cells, also called 
Ouscle Ƃbers
. Figure 18.18 Determination and differentiation of muscle cells. Skeletal muscle cells 
arise from embryonic cells as a result of changes in gene expression. (In this depiction, the 
process of gene activation is greatly simplified.)
WHAT IF? What would happen if a mutation in the myoD gene resulted in the production  
of an altered MyoD protein that could not activate the myoD gene?
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   434 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 436 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 435
molecules that guide development or determine how pat-
terns are established.
In the 1940s, scientists began using the genetic approach—
the study of mutants—to investigate Drosophila development. 
That approach has had spectacular success. These studies 
have established that genes control development and have 
led to an understanding of the key roles that specific mol-
ecules play in defining position and directing differentia-
tion. By combining anatomical, genetic, and biochemical 
approaches to the study of Drosophila development, research-
ers have discovered developmental principles common to 
many other species, including humans.
The Life Cycle of Drosophila
Fruit flies and other arthropods have a modular construc-
tion, an ordered series of segments. These segments make 
up the body’s three major parts: the head, the thorax (the 
mid-body, from which the wings and legs extend), and the 
abdomen (Figure 18.19a). Like other bilaterally symmetrical 
animals, Drosophila has an anterior-posterior (head-to-tail) 
axis, a dorsal-ventral (back-to-belly) axis, and a right-left axis. 
In Drosophila, cytoplasmic determinants that are localized 
in the unfertilized egg provide positional information for 
the placement of anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes 
even before fertilization. We’ll focus here on the molecules 
involved in establishing the anterior-posterior axis as a case 
in point.
The Drosophila egg develops in one of the female’s ovaries, 
next to the nurse cells, which supply the egg with nutrients, 
mRNAs, and other substances needed for development. The 
egg and nurse cells are surrounded by follicle cells, which 
make the eggshell (Figure 18.19b, top). After fertilization and 
laying of the egg, embryonic development results in the for-
mation of a segmented larva, which goes through three larval 
stages. Then, in a process much like that by which a caterpil-
lar becomes a butterfly, the fly larva forms a pupa in which it 
metamorphoses into the adult fly pictured in Figure 18.19a.
Genetic Analysis of Early Development: Scientific 
Inquiry
Edward B. Lewis was a visionary American biologist who, in 
the 1940s, first showed the value of the genetic approach 
to studying embryonic development in Drosophila. Lewis 
studied bizarre mutant flies with developmental defects that 
led to extra wings or legs in the wrong place (Figure 18.20). 
He located the mutations on the fly’s genetic map, thus con-
necting the developmental abnormalities to specific genes. 
This research supplied the first concrete evidence that genes 
somehow direct the developmental processes studied by 
embryologists. The genes Lewis discovered, called homeotic 
genes, are regulatory genes that control pattern formation 
in the fly.
Further insight into pattern formation during early 
embryonic development did not come for another 30 years, 
Nurse cell
Depleted
nurse cells
Fertilization
Laying of egg
Embryonic
development
Hatching
Follicle cell
Nucleus
Egg
Egg-
shell
Body
segments
BODY AXES
0.1 mm
0.5 mm
Head Thorax AbdomenDorsal
Ventral
Left
Posterior
Right
Anterior
Adult. The adult ﬂy is segmented, and multiple segments make 
up each of the three main body parts—head, thorax, and 
abdomen. The body axes are shown by arrows.
1
2
3
4
5
Developing egg
within one ovarian follicle 
(among many in an ovary). The 
egg (yellow) and nurse cells are 
surrounded by follicle cells.
Mature, unfertilized egg.
The developing egg enlarges as 
nutrients and mRNAs are 
supplied to it by the nurse cells, 
which shrink. Eventually, the 
mature egg Ƃlls the eggshell 
that has been secreted by the 
follicle cells. 
Fertilized egg.
The egg is fertilized within 
the mother and then laid.
Segmented embryo.
The egg develops into a 
segmented embryo.
Larva.
The embryo develops into a larva, 
which has three stages. The third 
stage forms a pupa (not shown), 
within which the larva metamorphoses 
into the adult shown in (a).
(a)
Development from egg to larva.(b)
. Figure 18.19 Key events in Drosophila development.
Wild 
type
Eye
Normal
antenna Mutant
Leg
instead of
antenna
. Figure 18.20 Abnormal pattern formation in Drosophila. 
Mutations in homeotic genes cause misplacement of structures in 
an animal, such as the legs extending from the mutant fly’s head in 
place of antenna (colorized SEMs).
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   435 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 437 ===

436 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
development, the mRNA or protein products of maternal effect 
genes are placed in the egg while it is still in the mother’s ovary. 
When the mother has a mutation in such a gene, she makes a 
defective gene product (or none at all), and her eggs are abnor-
mal; when these eggs are fertilized, they fail to develop properly.
Because maternal effect genes control the orientation 
(polarity) of the egg and consequently that of the fly, they are 
also called egg-polarity genes. Two groups of these genes set up 
the anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axes of the embryo. 
Like mutations in segmentation genes, mutations in maternal 
effect genes are generally embryonic lethals.
Bicoid: A Morphogen That Determines Head Structures  
To see how maternal effect genes determine the body axes of 
the offspring, we will focus on one such gene, called bicoid, 
a term meaning “two-tailed.” An embryo or larva whose 
mother has two mutant bicoid alleles lacks the front half of its 
body and has posterior structures at both ends (Figure 18.21). 
This phenotype suggested to Nüsslein-Volhard and her col-
leagues that the product of the mother’s bicoid gene is es-
sential for setting up the anterior end of the fly and might be 
concentrated at the future anterior end of the embryo. This 
hypothesis is an example of the morphogen gradient hypothesis 
first proposed by embryologists a century ago, in which gradi-
ents of substances called morphogens establish an embryo’s 
axes and other features of its form.
DNA technology and other modern biochemical methods 
enabled the researchers to test whether the bicoid product,
a protein called Bicoid, is in fact a morphogen that deter-
mines the anterior end of the fly. First, they asked whether 
the location of the mRNA and protein products of this gene in 
the egg was consistent with the hypothesis. They found that 
when two researchers in Germany, Christiane Nüsslein-
Volhard and Eric Wieschaus, set out to identify all the genes 
that affect segment formation in Drosophila. The project was 
daunting for three reasons. The first was the sheer number 
of Drosophila genes, now known to total about 14,000. The 
genes affecting segmentation might be just a few needles 
in a haystack or might be so numerous and varied that the 
scientists would be unable to make sense of them. Second, 
mutations affecting a process as fundamental as segmenta-
tion would surely be embryonic lethals, mutations with 
phenotypes causing death at the embryonic or larval stage. 
Because organisms with embryonic lethal mutations never 
reproduce, they cannot be bred for study. The researchers 
dealt with this problem by looking for recessive mutations, 
which can be propagated in heterozygous flies that act as 
genetic carriers. Third, cytoplasmic determinants in the egg 
were known to play a role in axis formation, so the research-
ers knew they would have to study the mother’s genes as 
well as those of the embryo. It is the mother’s genes that we 
will discuss further as we focus on how the anterior-posterior 
body axis is set up in the developing egg.
Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus began their search for 
segmentation genes by exposing flies to mutagenic agents 
and scanning their descendants for dead embryos or larvae 
with abnormal segmentation or other defects. For example, 
to find genes that might set up the anterior-posterior axis, 
they looked for embryos or larvae with abnormal ends, such 
as two heads or two tails, predicting that such abnormalities 
would arise from mutations in maternal genes required for 
correctly setting up the offspring’s head or tail end.
Using this approach, Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus 
eventually identified about 1,200 genes essential for pattern 
formation during embryonic development. Of these, about 
120 were essential for normal segmentation patterns. Next, 
the researchers were able to group these segmentation genes 
by general function and to isolate many of them for further 
study. The result was a detailed molecular understanding of 
the early steps in pattern formation in Drosophila.
When the results of Nüsslein-Volhard and Wieschaus 
were combined with Lewis’s earlier work, a coherent picture 
of Drosophila development emerged. In recognition of their 
discoveries, the three researchers were awarded a Nobel Prize 
in 1995. Let’s consider a specific example of the genes that 
Nüsslein-Volhard, Wieschaus, and co-workers found.
Axis Establishment
As we mentioned earlier, cytoplasmic determinants in the 
egg are the substances that initially establish the axes of the 
Drosophila body. These substances are encoded by genes of  
the mother, fittingly called maternal effect genes. A gene clas-
sified as a maternal effect gene is one that, when mutant 
in the mother, results in a mutant phenotype in the off-
spring, regardless of the offspring’s own genotype. In fruit fly 
250 om
Mutant larva (bicoid )
Wild-type larva
Head Tail
Tail Tail
T1T2T3
A1A2A3A4A5A6
A7
A8
A8
A7 A6 A7
A8
. Figure 18.21 Effect of the bicoid gene on Drosophila 
development. A wild-type fruit fly larva has a head, three thoracic 
(T) segments, eight abdominal (A) segments, and a tail. A larva 
whose mother has two mutant alleles of the bicoid gene has two 
tails and lacks all anterior structures (LMs).
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   436 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 438 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 437
bicoid mRNA is highly concentrated at the extreme anterior 
end of the mature egg (Figure 18.22). After the egg is fertil-
ized, the mRNA is translated into protein. The Bicoid protein 
then diffuses from the anterior end toward the posterior, 
resulting in a gradient of protein within the early embryo, 
most highly concentrated at the anterior end. These results 
are consistent with the hypothesis that Bicoid protein speci-
fies the fly’s anterior end. To test this more specifically, scien-
tists injected pure bicoid mRNA into various regions of early 
embryos. The protein that resulted from its translation caused 
anterior structures to form at the injection sites.
The bicoid research was groundbreaking for several rea-
sons. First, it led to the identification of a specific protein 
required for some of the earliest steps in pattern formation. 
It thus helped us understand how different regions of the egg 
can give rise to cells that go down different developmental 
pathways. Second, it increased our understanding of the 
mother’s critical role in the initial phases of embryonic devel-
opment. Third, the principle that a gradient of morphogens 
can determine polarity and position has proved to be a key 
developmental concept for a number of species, just as early 
embryologists had hypothesized.
Maternal mRNAs are crucial during development of many 
species. In Drosophila, gradients of specific proteins encoded 
by maternal mRNAs not only determine the posterior and 
anterior ends but also establish the dorsal-ventral axis. As the 
fly embryo grows, it reaches a point when the embryonic pro-
gram of gene expression takes over, and the maternal mRNAs 
must be destroyed. Later, positional information encoded by 
the embryo’s genes, operating on an ever finer scale, estab-
lishes a specific number of correctly oriented segments and 
triggers the formation of each segment’s characteristic struc-
tures. Mutant genes affecting this final step can lead to an 
abnormal adult pattern, as you saw in Figure 18.20.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Role of bicoid Gene  
in Drosophila Development
 Mastering Biology Interview with Nancy 
Hopkins: Studying the genetic basis of 
development in zebrafish
Evolutionary Developmental Biology (“Evo-Devo”)
EVOLUTION The fly with legs emerging from its head in 
Figure 18.20 is the result of a single mutation in one gene, a 
homeotic gene. The gene does not encode any antenna pro-
tein, however. Instead, it encodes a transcription factor that 
regulates other genes, and its malfunction leads to misplaced 
structures, such as legs instead of antennae. The observation 
that a change in gene regulation during development could 
lead to such a fantastic change in body form prompted some 
scientists to consider whether these types of mutations could 
contribute to evolution by generating novel body shapes. 
Ultimately, this line of inquiry gave rise to the field of evolu-
tionary developmental biology, so-called “evo-devo,” which 
will be further discussed in Concept 20.6.
Experiment U s i n g  a  g e n e t i c  a p p r o a c h  t o  s t u d y  Drosophila 
development, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard and colleagues at 
two research institutions in Germany analyzed expression of 
the bicoid gene. The researchers hypothesized that bicoid nor-
mally codes for a morphogen that specifies the head (ante-
rior) end of the embryo. To begin to test this hypothesis, they 
used molecular techniques to determine whether the mRNA 
and protein encoded by this gene were found in the anterior 
end of the fertilized egg and early embryo of wild-type flies.
Results Bicoid mRNA (dark blue in the light micrographs 
and drawings) was confined to the anterior end of the un-
fertilized egg. Later in development, Bicoid protein (dark 
orange) was seen to be concentrated in cells at the anterior 
end of the embryo.
Bicoid mRNA in mature 
unfertilized egg
Bicoid protein in 
early embryo
Anterior endAnterior end
Fertilization,
translation of
bicoid mRNA
100 om
Conclusion T h e  l o c a t i o n  o f  bicoid mRNA and the diffuse 
gradient of Bicoid protein seen later are consistent with the 
hypothesis that Bicoid protein is a morphogen specifying 
formation of head-specific structures.
Further Reading C. Nüsslein-Volhard et al., Determination of anteroposterior 
polarity in Drosophila, Science 238:1675–1681 (1987); W. Driever and C. Nüsslein-
Volhard, A gradient of Bicoid protein in Drosophila embryos, Cell 54:83–93 (1988); 
T. Berleth et al., The role of localization of bicoid RNA in organizing the anterior 
pattern of the Drosophila embryo, EMBO Journal 7:1749–1756 (1988).
WHAT IF? The researchers needed further evidence, so they 
injected bicoid mRNA into the anterior end of an egg from a 
female with a mutation disabling the bicoid gene. Given that the 
hypothesis was supported, what must their results have been?
Could Bicoid be a morphogen that determines 
the anterior end of a fruit fly?
. Figure 18.22 Inquiry
In this section, we have seen how a carefully orchestrated 
program of sequential gene regulation controls the trans-
formation of a fertilized egg into a multicellular organism. 
The program is carefully balanced between turning on the 
genes for differentiation in the right place and turning off 
other genes. Even when an organism is fully developed, gene 
expression is regulated in a similarly fine-tuned manner. In 
the final section of the chapter, we’ll consider how fine this 
tuning is by looking at how specific changes in expression of 
just a few genes can lead to the development of cancer.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   437 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 439 ===

438 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
causing gene? In general, an oncogene arises from a genetic 
change that leads to an increase either in the amount of the 
proto-oncogene’s protein product or in the intrinsic activity 
of each protein molecule. The genetic changes that convert 
proto-oncogenes to oncogenes fall into four main catego-
ries (Figure 18.23): epigenetic changes, translocations, gene 
amplification, and point mutations.
First, alterations in epigenetic modifications that can 
lead to abnormal chromatin condensation in a cell are 
often found in tumor cells. If a mutation in a gene for a 
chromatin-modifying enzyme leads to loosening of chro-
matin in a region that is normally not being expressed, a 
proto-oncogene in that region could be expressed at abnor-
mally high levels (see Figure 18.23a). For example, a gene for 
one such enzyme has been shown to be mutated in 20% of 
tumor cells analyzed.
Second, cancer cells are frequently found to contain 
chromosomes that have broken and rejoined incorrectly, 
translocating fragments from one chromosome to another 
(see Figure 15.14). If a translocated proto-oncogene ends up 
near an especially active promoter (or other control element), 
its transcription may increase, making it an oncogene (see 
Figure 18.23b). 
The third main type of genetic change, amplification, 
increases the number of copies of the proto-oncogene in 
the cell through repeated gene duplication (discussed in 
Concept 20.5; see Figure 18.23c).
Fourth, a point mutation either in the promoter or an 
enhancer that controls a proto-oncogene, could cause an 
increase in its expression. A point mutation in the coding 
sequence of the proto-oncogene could change the gene’s 
product to a protein that is more active or more resistant to 
degradation than the normal protein (see Figure 18.23d).
Any of these four mechanisms can lead to abnormal stimu-
lation of the cell cycle and put the cell on the path to becom-
ing a cancer cell.
In addition to genes whose products normally promote cell 
division, cells contain genes whose normal products inhibit 
cell division. Such genes are called tumor-suppressor 
genes since the proteins they encode help prevent uncon-
trolled cell growth. Any mutation that decreases the normal 
activity of a tumor-suppressor protein may contribute to the 
onset of cancer, in effect stimulating growth through the 
absence of suppression.
The protein products of tumor-suppressor genes have 
various functions. Some repair damaged DNA, which 
prevents the cell from accumulating cancer-causing muta-
tions. Other tumor-suppressor proteins control adhesion 
of cells to each other or to the extracellular matrix; proper 
cell anchorage is crucial in normal tissues and is often 
absent in cancers. Still other tumor-suppressor proteins 
are components of cell-signaling pathways that inhibit the 
cell cycle.
CONCEPT CHECK 18.4
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS As you learned in Chapter 12, mitosis 
gives rise to two daughter cells that are genetically identical 
to the parent cell. Yet you, the product of many mitotic divi-
sions, are not composed of identical, zygote-like cells. Why?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how the signaling 
molecules released by an embryonic cell can induce 
changes in a neighboring cell without entering the cell. 
(See Figures 9.15 and 9.16.)
3. How do fruit fly maternal effect genes determine the 
polarity of the egg and the embryo?
4. WHAT IF? In Figure 18.17b, the lower cell is synthesizing 
signaling molecules, whereas the upper cell is expressing 
receptors for these molecules. In terms of gene regulation 
and cytoplasmic determinants, explain how these cells came 
to synthesize different molecules.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 18.5
Cancer results from genetic changes 
that affect cell cycle control
In Concept 12.3, we considered cancer as a disease in 
which cells escape from their normal cell division control 
mechanisms. Now that we have discussed the molecular 
basis of gene expression and its regulation, we can look at 
cancer more closely. The gene regulation systems that go 
wrong during cancer turn out to be the very same systems 
that play important roles in embryonic development, the 
immune response, and many other biological processes. 
Thus, research into the molecular basis of cancer has both 
benefited from and informed many other fields of biology.
Types of Genes Associated with Cancer
The genes that normally regulate cell growth and division 
during the cell cycle include genes for growth factors, their 
receptors, and the intracellular molecules of signaling 
pathways. (To review cell signaling, see Concept 9.2; for 
regulation of the cell cycle, see Concept 12.3.) Mutations 
that alter any of these genes in somatic cells can lead to 
cancer. The agent of such change can be random spontane-
ous mutation. Many cancer-causing mutations likely also 
result from environmental influences: chemical carcino-
gens like tobacco, X-rays and other high-energy radiation, 
and some viruses.
Cancer research uncovered cancer-causing genes called 
oncogenes (from the Greek onco, tumor) in certain types of 
viruses. Later, related versions of viral oncogenes were found 
in the genomes of humans and other animals. The normal 
versions of the cellular genes, called proto-oncogenes, code 
for proteins that stimulate normal cell growth and division.
How might a proto-oncogene—a gene that has an essential 
function in normal cells—become an oncogene, a cancer- 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   438 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 440 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 439
Proto-oncogene
Proto-oncogene
Proto-oncogene Proto-oncogene
(b) Translocation or transposition:
gene moved to new locus,
under new controls
New
promoter
Normal growth-stimulating 
protein in excess
(c) Gene ampliƂECVion
multiple copies of the gene
(d) Point mutation
within a control element
Point mutation
within the gene
Oncogene
Normal growth-stimulating
protein in excess
Normal growth-stimulating
protein in excess
Hyperactive or
degradation-
resistant protein
Normal growth-stimulating
protein in excess
Oncogene
Oncogene
(a) Epigenetic changes: Mutation in a gene for a 
chromatin-modifying enzyme can lead to 
loosening of the chromatin and inappropriate 
expression of a proto-oncogene.
. Figure 18.23 Genetic changes that can turn proto-oncogenes into oncogenes.
Interference with Normal Cell-Signaling 
Pathways
Let’s consider how protein components of cell-signaling 
pathways function in normal cells and what goes wrong with 
their function in cancer cells. We will focus on the products 
of two key genes, the ras proto-oncogene and the p53 tumor-
suppressor gene. Mutations in ras occur in about 30% of 
human cancers and mutations in p53 in more than 50%.
The Ras protein, encoded by the ras gene (named for 
rat sarcoma, a connective tissue cancer), is a G protein that 
relays a signal from a growth factor receptor on the plasma 
membrane to a cascade of protein kinases (see Figures 9.8 
and 9.10). The cellular response at the end of the pathway 
is the synthesis of a protein that stimulates the cell cycle 
(Figure 18.24a). Normally, such a pathway will not operate 
unless triggered by the appropriate growth factor. But certain 
mutations in the ras gene can lead to production of a hyper-
active Ras protein that triggers the kinase cascade even in 
the absence of growth factor, resulting in increased cell divi-
sion (Figure 18.24b). In fact, hyperactive versions or excess 
amounts of any of the pathway’s components can have the 
same outcome: excessive cell division.
Figure 18.25a shows a pathway in which an intracellular 
signal leads to the synthesis of a protein that suppresses 
the cell cycle. In this case, the signal is damage to the cell’s 
DNA, perhaps as the result of exposure to ultraviolet light. 
Operation of this signaling pathway blocks the cell cycle 
until the damage has been repaired. Otherwise, the damage 
might contribute to tumor formation by causing mutations 
or chromosomal abnormalities. Thus, the genes for the 
components of the pathway act as tumor-suppressor genes. 
The p53 gene, named for the apparent molecular weight of 
its protein product, is a tumor-suppressor gene. The protein 
it encodes is a specific transcription factor that promotes 
the synthesis of cell cycle–inhibiting proteins. That is 
why a mutation that knocks out the p53 gene or in a gene 
required to activate the p53 protein (for example, a gene 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   439 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 441 ===

440 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
1 2
3
4
5
6
Protein kinases
NUCLEUS
4
5
Receptor2
Growth factor1
Transcription
factor (activator)
Normal
cell division
Protein that
stimulates
the cell cycle
6
MUTATION
Ras
GTP
G protein3
Ras
NUCLEUS
Transcription
factor (activator)
Increased
cell division
Hyperactive Ras protein (product 
of oncogene) issues signals on 
its own, whether or not growth 
factor is bound to the receptor.
Protein 
expressed 
all the time 
(overexpression)
GTP
(a) Normal cell cycle–stimulating pathway.
The normal pathway is triggered by    
     a growth factor that binds to      its re-
ceptor in the plasma membrane. The signal 
is relayed to      a G protein called Ras. 
Like all G proteins, Ras is active when GTP 
is bound to it. Ras passes the signal to
     a series of protein kinases. The last 
kinase activates      a transcription factor 
(activator) that turns on one or more 
genes for      a protein that stimulates
the cell cycle.
(b) Mutant cell cycle–stimulating pathway.
If a mutation makes Ras or any other 
pathway component abnormally active, 
excessive cell division and cancer 
may result.
. Figure 18.24 Normal and mutant cell cycle–stimulating pathway.
Protein kinases (such as ATM)2
DNA damage
in genome
Active form
of p53
31 Transcription4
5
1
2
34
5
UV
light
NUCLEUS
No cell
division
Protein that
inhibits the 
cell cycle
Damaged DNA
is not replicated.
DNA damage
in genome
UV
light
Increased
cell division
Inhibitory
protein 
absent
Cell cycle is
not inhibited.
MUTATION
Defective, inactive, or 
missing transcription 
factor, such as p53, 
cannot activate 
transcription.
(a) Normal cell cycle–inhibiting 
pathway. In the normal pathway,                      
      DNA damage is an intracellular 
signal that is passed via       protein 
kinases, leading to activation of       
      p53.       Activated  p53 promotes 
transcription of the gene for       a 
protein that inhibits the cell cycle. 
The resulting suppression of cell 
division ensures that the damaged
DNA is not replicated. If the DNA 
damage is irreparable, then the p53
signal leads to apoptosis.
(b) Mutant cell cycle–inhibiting 
pathway. Mutations causing 
deƂciencies in any pathway 
component can contribute to the 
development of cancer.
. Figure 18.25 Normal and mutant cell cycle–inhibiting pathway.
? Explain whether a cancer-causing 
mutation in a tumor-suppressor gene, 
such as p53, is more likely to be a 
recessive or a dominant mutation.
called ATM) can lead to excessive cell growth and cancer 
(Figure 18.25b).
The p53 gene has been called the “guardian angel of the 
genome.” Once the p53 protein is activated—say, by the ATM 
protein, a protein kinase, after DNA damage—p53 activates 
several other genes, such as p21. The p21 protein halts the cell 
cycle by binding to cyclin-dependent kinases, allowing time 
for the cell to repair the DNA. Researchers recently showed 
that p53 also activates expression of a group of miRNAs that 
inhibit the cell cycle. The p53 protein can also turn on genes 
directly involved in DNA repair. If DNA damage is irreparable, 
p53 activates “suicide” genes, whose protein products bring 
about programmed cell death (apoptosis; see Figure 9.20). 
Thus, p53 acts in several ways to prevent a cell from passing 
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   440 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 442 ===

 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 441
The model of a multistep path to cancer is well supported 
by studies of one of the best-understood types of human can-
cer: colorectal cancer, which affects the colon and/or rectum. 
About 140,000 new cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed 
each year in the United States, and the disease causes 50,000 
deaths per year. Like most cancers, colorectal cancer devel-
ops gradually (Figure 18.26). The first sign is often a polyp, 
a small, benign growth in the colon lining. The cells of the 
polyp look normal, although they divide unusually fre-
quently. The tumor grows and may eventually become malig-
nant, invading other tissues. The development of a malignant 
tumor is paralleled by a gradual accumulation of mutations 
that convert proto-oncogenes to oncogenes and knock out 
tumor-suppressor genes. A ras oncogene and a mutated p53 
tumor-suppressor gene are often involved.
About half a dozen changes must occur at the DNA level 
for a cell to become fully cancerous. These changes usually 
include the appearance of at least one active oncogene and 
the mutation or loss of several tumor-suppressor genes. 
Furthermore, since mutant tumor-suppressor alleles are 
usually recessive, in most cases mutations must knock out 
both alleles in a cell’s genome to block tumor suppression. 
(Most oncogenes, on the other hand, behave as dominant 
alleles.)
Since we understand the progression of this type of can-
cer, routine screenings (colonoscopies, for example) are 
recommended to identify and remove any suspicious polyps. 
The colorectal cancer mortality rate has been declining for 
the past 20 years due to increased screening and improved 
treatments. Treatments for other cancers have improved as 
well. Advances in the sequencing of DNA and mRNA allow 
medical researchers to compare the genes expressed by dif-
ferent types of tumors and by the same type in different peo-
ple. These comparisons have led to personalized treatments 
based on the molecular characteristics of a person’s tumor; 
Figure 18.27 shows how this approach has been applied to 
breast cancer.
 Mastering Biology HHMI  
Animation: Using p53 to Fight Cancer 
on mutations due to DNA damage. If mutations do accu-
mulate and the cell survives through many divisions—as is 
more likely if the p53 tumor-suppressor gene is defective or 
missing—cancer may ensue. The many functions of p53 sug-
gest a complex picture of regulation in normal cells, one that 
we do not yet fully understand.
A recent study of elephants may underscore the protec-
tive role of p53. The incidence of cancer among elephants in 
zoo-based studies has been estimated at about 3%, compared 
with closer to 30% for humans. Genome sequencing revealed 
that elephants have 20 copies of the p53 gene, compared to 
one copy in humans, other mammals, and even manatees, 
elephants’ closest living relatives. There are undoubtedly other 
underlying reasons, but the correlation between low cancer rate 
and extra copies of the p53 gene bears further investigation.
For the present, the diagrams in Figure 18.24 and Figure 18.25 
are an accurate view of how mutations can contribute to cancer, 
but we still don’t know exactly how a particular cell becomes a 
cancer cell. Recent studies have shown, for instance, that DNA 
methylation and histone modification patterns in normal cells 
differ from those in cancer cells and that miRNAs probably par-
ticipate in cancer development. There is still a lot to learn, and 
you and your classmates may be the ones to make important 
discoveries about cancer biology.
The Multistep Model of Cancer 
Development
More than one somatic mutation or epigenetic change is gener-
ally needed to produce all the changes characteristic of a full-
fledged cancer cell. This may help explain why the incidence 
of cancer increases greatly with age. If cancer results from an 
accumulation of mutations that occur throughout life, then the 
longer we live, the more likely we are to develop cancer.
Colon wall
Colon
Normal colon
epithelial cells
Small benign
growth (polyp)
Larger benign
growth (adenoma)
Malignant tumor
(carcinoma)
     Loss of tumor-
suppressor gene
APC (or other)
1      Activation of 
ras oncogene
2
3
      Loss of
tumor-suppressor
gene p53
      Loss of
tumor-suppressor
gene SMAD4
4
      Additional 
mutations
5
. Figure 18.26 A multistep model for the development of colorectal cancer. This type 
of cancer is one of the best understood. Changes in a tumor parallel a series of genetic changes, 
including mutations affecting several tumor-suppressor genes (such as p53) and the ras proto-
oncogene. Mutations of tumor-suppressor genes often entail loss (deletion) of the gene. APC stands 
for adenomatous polyposis coli, and SMAD4 is a gene involved in signaling that results in apoptosis.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   441 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 443 ===

Modern medicine that melds genome-wide molecular studies with 
cell-signaling research is transforming the treatment of many 
diseases, such as breast cancer. Using microarray analysis (see 
Figure 19.13) and other techniques, researchers measured the 
relative levels of mRNA transcripts for every gene in hundreds of 
breast cancer tumor samples. They identiƂed four major subtypes 
of breast cancer that differ in their expression of three signal 
receptors involved in regulating cell growth and division: 
r Estrogen receptor alpha (ERc)
r Progesterone receptor (PR)
r HER2, a type of receptor called a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK);      
   other RTKs are also present, such as HER3              
(ERc and PR are steroid receptors; see Figure 9.9.) The absence or 
excess expression of these receptors can cause aberrant cell signal-
ing, leading in some cases to inappropriate cell division, which can  
contribute to cancer (see Figure 18.24).
Estrogen
receptor
alpha (ERc)  
Support cell
Duct
interior
Extracellular
matrix
HER3
HER2 Progesterone
receptor (PR)
In a normal breast cell, the three signal receptors 
are at normal levels (indicated by +):
r '4c+
r|24+
r|*'4+
Normal Breast Cells in a Milk Duct
Milk
duct
Mammary
gland lobule Epithelial
milk-secreting cell
m  A research scientist examines DNA-sequencing 
data from breast cancer samples.
/uni25BC Figure 18.27
Genomics, Cell Signaling, and Cancer
MAKE CONNECTIONS
442 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   442 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 444 ===

Each breast cancer subtype is characterized by the overexpression (indicated by ++ or +++) or 
absence (–) of three signal receptors: ERc, PR, and HER2. Breast cancer treatments are 
becoming more effective because they can be tailored to the speciﬁc cancer subtype.
r '4c–
r|24–
r *'42–
r 5– of Dreast cancers
r /ore aggressiXe poorer
   prognosis tJan otJer suDt[pes
r '4cs or '4c+
r|24–
r *'4++
r 0s of Dreast cancers
r 2oorer prognosis tJan
   luOinal # suDt[pe
r '4c++
r|24++
r|*'42– 
sJoYn Jere soOe *'4++
r &iXide rapidl[
r 5– of Dreast cancers
r 2oorer prognosis tJan luOinal #
r '4c+++
r|24++
r|*'42–
r  of Dreast cancers
r $est prognosis
Luminal A Luminal B Basal-like
HER2
Treatment with Herceptin for the HER2 subtype
Both luminal subtypes overexpress ERc (luminal A more than luminal B) and 
PR, and usually lack expression of HER2. Both can be treated with drugs that 
target ERc and inactivate it, the most well-known drug being tamoxifen. 
These subtypes can also be treated with drugs that inhibit estrogen synthesis.
The HER2 subtype overexpresses HER2. Because it does 
not express PR (and, in many cases,  ERc) at normal 
levels, the cells are unresponsive to therapies that target 
PR (and, for ERc– cells, ERc). However, patients with
the HER2 subtype  can be treated with Herceptin, 
an antibody protein that inactivates  HER2  
(see  Concept 12.3). 
The basal-like subtype is "triple negative"—it usually 
does not express ERc, PR, or HER2. It often has
a mutation in the tumor-suppressor gene BRCA1
(see Concept 18.5). Treatments that target ERc, PR, 
or HER2 are not effective, but new treatments are 
being developed. Currently, patients are treated 
with cytotoxic chemotherapy, which selectively kills 
fast-growing cells. 
Signaling
molecule Dimer
Herceptin
HER2
HER3
# signaling 
Oolecule 
sucJ as a 
groYtJ factor Dinds 
as a ligand to a single 
*'4 
a OonoOer 
alloYing it to associ-
ate YitJ anotJer *'4
2atients YitJ tJe *'42 suDt[pe 
are treated YitJ tJe drug *erceptin 
YJicJ can Dind to *'4
9Jen Dound to *'4 *erceptin 
DlocMs signaling and eZcessiXe cell 
diXision in certain patients
'Xen YitJout a 
ligand Dound *'4   
can associate YitJ 
anotJer *'4 *ere  
*'4 and *'42 associ-
ate closel[ togetJer 
forOing a diOer
(orOation of a 
diOer actiXates eacJ 
OonoOer
'acJ OonoOer 
adds pJospJate froO 
#62 to tJe otJer 
OonoOer triggering 
a signal transduction 
patJYa[
6Je signal is transduced tJrougJ 
tJe cell YJicJ leads to a cellular 
responsetin tJis case turning on 
genes tJat trigger cell diXision *'4 
cells JaXe up to  tiOes as Oan[ 
*'4 receptors as norOal cells so tJe[ 
undergo uncontrolled cell diXision 
Breast Cancer Subtypes
ATP ADP
P P
P P
P P
HER2
HER2 Bound herceptin
'4c
24
*'4
*'4
Response
(cell division)
1 2 3 4 5
1 2
When researchers compared gene expression in normal breast cells 
and cells from breast cancers, they found that the genes showing 
the most significant differences in expression encoded signal re-
ceptors, as shown here. Given what you learned in Chapters 9, 12, 
and this chapter, explain why this result is not surprising.
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 443
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   443 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 445 ===

444 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
working on this problem in the mid-1970s. After 16 years of 
research, she convincingly demonstrated that mutations in 
one gene—BRCA1—were associated with increased susceptibil-
ity to breast cancer, a finding that flew in the face of medical 
opinion at the time. (BRCA stands for breast cancer.) Mutations 
in that gene or a gene called BRCA2 are found in at least half of 
inherited breast cancers, and tests using DNA sequencing can 
detect these mutations. A woman who inherits one mutant 
BRCA1 allele has a 60% probability of developing breast cancer 
before the age of 50, compared with only a 2% probability for 
an individual homozygous for the normal allele.
BRCA1 and BRCA2 are considered tumor-suppressor 
genes because their wild-type alleles protect against breast 
cancer and their mutant alleles are recessive. (Mutations in 
BRCA1 are commonly found in the genomes of cells from 
basal-like breast cancers; see Figure 18.27.) The BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 proteins both appear to function in the cell’s DNA 
damage repair pathway. More is known about BRCA2: Along 
with another protein, it helps repair breaks that occur in 
both strands of DNA, a function crucial for maintaining 
undamaged DNA.
Because DNA breakage can contribute to cancer, it makes 
sense that the risk of cancer can be lowered by minimizing 
exposure to DNA-damaging agents, such as the ultravio-
let radiation in sunlight and chemicals found in cigarette 
smoke. Novel genomics-based analyses of specific cancers, 
such as the approach described in Figure 18.27, are con-
tributing to both early diagnosis and development of treat-
ments that interfere with expression of key genes in tumors. 
Ultimately, such approaches are expected to lower the death 
rate from cancer.
The Role of Viruses in Cancer
The study of genes associated with cancer, inherited or not, 
increases our basic understanding of how disruption of nor-
mal gene regulation can result in this disease. In addition to 
the mutations and other genetic alterations described in this 
section, a number of tumor viruses can cause cancer in vari-
ous animals, including humans. In fact, one of the earliest 
breakthroughs in understanding cancer came in 1911, when 
Peyton Rous, an American pathologist, discovered a virus that 
causes cancer in chickens. Also, the Epstein-Barr virus, which 
causes infectious mononucleosis, has been linked to several 
types of cancer in humans, notably Burkitt’s lymphoma. 
Papillomaviruses cause cancer of the cervix, and a virus called 
HTLV-1 causes a type of adult leukemia. Viruses play a role in 
about 15% of the cases of human cancer.
Viruses may at first seem very different from muta-
tions as a cause of cancer. However, we now know that 
Breast cancer is the second most common form of cancer 
in the United States, and the first among women. Each year, 
this cancer strikes over 230,000 women (and some men) in 
the United States and kills 40,000 (450,000 worldwide). A 
major problem with understanding breast cancer is its hetero-
geneity: Tumors differ in significant ways. Identifying differ-
ences between types of breast cancer is expected to improve 
treatment and decrease the mortality rate. In 2012, the 
Cancer Genome Atlas Network, sponsored by the National 
Institutes of Health, published the results of a multi-team 
effort that used a genomics approach to profile subtypes of 
breast cancer based on their molecular signatures. Four major 
types of breast cancer were identified (Figure 18.27). It is 
now routine to screen for the presence of particular signaling 
receptors in any breast cancer tumors, and individuals with 
breast cancer, along with their physicians, can now make 
more informed decisions about their treatments.
Inherited Predisposition and Environmental 
Factors Contributing to Cancer
The fact that multiple genetic changes are required to pro-
duce a cancer cell helps explain the observation that cancers 
can run in families. An individual inheriting an oncogene or a 
mutant allele of a tumor-suppressor gene is one step closer to 
accumulating the necessary mutations for cancer to develop 
than is an individual without any such mutations.
Geneticists are working to identify inherited cancer alleles 
so that predisposition to certain cancers can be detected 
early in life. About 15% of colorectal cancers, for example, 
involve inherited mutations. One syndrome, called heredi-
tary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), increases an indi-
vidual’s lifetime risk of colon cancer to 50–70%. HNPCC, 
also known as Lynch syndrome, is caused by an autosomal 
dominant allele of any one of a group of DNA repair genes, 
underscoring the importance of DNA repair systems. This 
syndrome is responsible for 2–5% of colon cancers. Other 
inherited mutations that cause colon cancer affect the tumor-
suppressor gene called adenomatous polyposis coli, or APC (see 
Figure 18.26). This gene has multiple functions in the cell, 
including regulation of cell migration and adhesion. Even in 
patients with no family history of the disease, the APC gene 
is mutated in 60% of colorectal cancers. In these individuals, 
new mutations must have occurred in both APC alleles before 
the gene’s function is lost. Currently, only 15% of colorectal 
cancers are associated with known inherited mutations, so 
researchers continue to try to identify “markers” that could 
predict the risk of developing this type of cancer.
Given the prevalence and significance of breast cancer, it is 
not surprising that it was one of the first cancers for which the 
role of inheritance was investigated. It turns out that for 5–10% 
of patients with breast cancer, there is evidence of a strong 
inherited predisposition. Geneticist Mary-Claire King began 
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Mary-Claire King: Discovering 
breast cancer genes
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   444 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 446 ===

  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
18 Chapter Review
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 18.1
Bacteria often respond to environmental change  
by regulating transcription (pp. 416–420)
• Cells control metabolism by regulating enzyme activity or 
the expression of genes coding for enzymes. In bacteria, genes 
are often clustered into operons, with one promoter serving 
several adjacent genes. An operator site on the DNA switches 
the operon on or off, resulting in coordinate regulation of the 
genes.
RNA
polymerase
Promoter Genes
Operator
AB
Operon
Polypeptides
CBA
C
• Both repressible and inducible operons are examples of negative 
gene regulation. In either type of operon, binding of a specific 
repressor protein to the operator shuts off transcription. (The 
repressor is encoded by a separate regulatory gene.) In a repres-
sible operon (usually encoding anabolic enzymes), the repressor 
is active when bound to a corepressor, often the end product of 
the pathway.
Promoter
Operator
CorepressorInactive repressor:
no corepressor present
Active repressor:
corepressor bound
Genes
Genes
expressed
Repressible
operon:
Genes not
expressed
• In an inducible operon (usually encoding catabolic enzymes), 
binding of an inducer to an innately active repressor inactivates 
the repressor and turns on transcription.
Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated at many 
stages (pp. 420–429)
Chromatin modiƂECVion
r )enes in highly coOpacted 
chroOatin are generally not 
transcribed
TTCnUETiRVion
r 4egulation of transcription initiation
&0# EonVrol 
elements in 
enhanEers bind 
speciƂc tran-
scription factors
$ending of the &0# enables CEViXCVoTU 
to contact proteins at the proOoter, 
initiating transcription
r %oordinate regulation in each cell type
r AlternCViXG40#URNiEing
r +nitiation of translation can be controlled via 
regulation of initiation factors
r Histone CEetylation 
loosens chroOatin 
structure, enhancing 
transcription
r &0#OGVhylation generally 
reduces transcription
'nhancer for
liver-speciƂc genes
2riOary 40#
transcript
O40#
'nhancer for 
lens-speciƂc genes
40#RroEGUUing
r Each O40# has a characteristic 
life span, deterOined in part by 
seSuences in the 5¿ and 3¿ UT4s
O40#dGgTCdCVion
Translation
r 2rotein processing and degradation are 
subLect to regulation
ProVGinRroEGUUingCnddGgTCdCVion
%*41/A6+0/1&+(+%A6+10
64#05%4+26+10
40#241%'55+0)
O40#
&')4#&A6+10
64#05.A6+10
2416'+0241%'55+0)
#0&&')4#&A6+10
14
CONCEPT 18.2
viruses can interfere with gene regulation in several ways 
if they integrate their genetic material into the DNA of 
a cell. Viral integration may donate an oncogene to the 
cell, disrupt a tumor-suppressor gene, or convert a proto-
oncogene to an oncogene. Some viruses produce proteins 
that inactivate p53 and other tumor-suppressor proteins, 
making the cell more prone to becoming cancerous. 
Viruses are powerful biological agents; you’ll learn more 
about them in Chapter 26.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Causes of Cancer
CONCEPT CHECK 18.5
1. Cancer-promoting mutations are likely to have different 
effects on the activity of proteins encoded by proto-
oncogenes than they do on proteins encoded by tumor-
suppressor genes. Explain.
2. Under what circumstances is cancer considered to have a 
hereditary component?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS The p53 protein can activate genes 
involved in apoptosis. Review Concept 9.5, and discuss how 
mutations in genes coding for proteins that function in apop-
tosis could contribute to cancer.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Promoter
Genes not
expressed
Genes
expressed
Inactive repressor:
inducer bound
Active repressor:
no inducer present Inducer
OperatorGenes
Inducible
operon:
• Some operons have positive gene regulation via a stimulatory 
activator protein (such as CRP , when activated by cyclic AMP), 
binds to a site within the promoter and stimulates transcription.
? Compare and contrast the roles of a corepressor and an inducer in 
negative regulation of an operon.
? Describe what must happen in a cell for a gene specific to that cell 
type to be transcribed.
 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 445
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   445 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 447 ===

CONCEPT 18.4
A program of differential gene expression leads  
to the different cell types in a multicellular  
organism (pp. 431–438)
• Embryonic cells become committed to a certain fate 
(determination), and undergo differentiation, becoming 
specialized in structure and function for their determined fate. 
Cells differ in structure and function not because they contain 
different genomes but because they express different genes. 
Morphogenesis encompasses the processes that give shape to 
the organism and its various structures.
• Localized cytoplasmic determinants in the unfertilized egg 
are distributed differentially to daughter cells, where they regulate 
the expression of those cells’ developmental fates. In the process 
called induction, signaling molecules from embryonic cells 
cause transcriptional changes in nearby target cells.
• Differentiation is marked by the appearance of tissue-specific 
proteins, which enable differentiated cells to carry out their spe-
cialized roles.
• In animals, pattern formation, the development of a spatial 
organization of tissues and organs, begins in the early embryo. 
Positional information, the molecular cues that control pat-
tern formation, tells a cell its location relative to the body’s axes 
and to other cells. In Drosophila, gradients of morphogens en-
coded by maternal effect genes determine the body axes. For 
example, the gradient of Bicoid protein determines the anterior-
posterior axis.
? Describe the two main processes that cause embryonic cells to head 
down different pathways to their final fates.
CONCEPT 18.5
Cancer results from genetic changes that affect cell 
cycle control (pp. 438–445)
• The products of proto-oncogenes and tumor-suppressor 
genes control cell division. A DNA change that makes a proto-
oncogene overly active converts it to an oncogene, which may 
promote extra cell division and cancer. A tumor-suppressor gene 
encodes a protein that inhibits abnormal cell division. A muta-
tion that reduces the activity of its protein product may lead to 
excessive cell division and cancer.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
11. DRAW IT The diagram below shows five genes, including their 
enhancers, from the genome of a certain species. Imagine that 
yellow, blue, green, black, red, and purple activator proteins 
exist that can bind to the appropriately color-coded control 
elements in the enhancers of these genes.
Enhancer Promoter
Gene 1
Gene 2
Gene 3
Gene 4
Gene 5
(a) Draw an X above enhancer elements (of all the genes) that 
would have activators bound in a cell in which only gene 5 is 
transcribed. Identify which colored activators would be present.
(b) Draw a dot above all enhancer elements that would have acti-
vators bound in a cell in which the green, blue, and yellow acti-
vators are present. Identify which gene(s) would be transcribed.
(c) Imagine that genes 1, 2, and 4 code for nerve-specific pro-
teins, and genes 3 and 5 are skin-specific. Identify which 
activators would be present in each cell type to ensure tran-
scription of the appropriate genes.
446 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
• Many proto-oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes encode 
components of growth-stimulating and growth-inhibiting signal-
ing pathways, respectively, and mutations in them can interfere 
with normal cell-signaling pathways. A hyperactive version of a 
protein in a stimulatory pathway, such as Ras (a G protein), func-
tions as an oncogene protein. A defective version of a protein in 
an inhibitory pathway, such as p53 (a transcription activator), 
fails to act as a tumor suppressor.
Protein (such as Ras)
overexpressed
Protein (such as p53) 
nonfunctional
Cell cycle
overstimulated
Increased cell
division
Cell cycle not
inhibited
EFFECTS OF MUTATIONS
• In the multistep model of cancer development, normal cells are 
converted to cancer cells by the accumulation of mutations af-
fecting proto-oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes. Technical 
advances in DNA and mRNA sequencing are enabling cancer 
treatments that are more individually based.
• Genomics-based studies have resulted in researchers proposing 
four subtypes of breast cancer, based on expression of genes by 
tumor cells.
• Individuals who inherit a mutant allele of a proto-oncogene or 
tumor-suppressor gene have a predisposition to develop a particu-
lar cancer. Certain viruses promote cancer by integration of viral 
DNA into a cell’s genome.
? Compare the usual functions of proteins encoded by proto-
oncogenes with those of proteins encoded by tumor-suppressor genes.
CONCEPT 18.3
Noncoding RNAs play multiple roles in controlling 
gene expression (pp. 429–431)
r 5Oall andor large noncoding 40#s 
can proOote heterochroOatin 
forOation in certain regions, which 
can block transcription
Chromatin modiƂECVion
r miRNA or siRNA can block the translation 
of speciƂc O40#s
Translation
r Oi40# or si40# can target speciƂc O40#s for destruction
mRNA degradation
CHROMATIN MODIFICATION
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA PROCESSING
mRNA
DEGRADATION
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN PROCESSING
AND DEGRADATION
? Why are miRNAs called noncoding RNAs? Explain how they 
participate in gene regulation.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–10 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   446 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 448 ===

The flashlight fish has an organ under its eye that emits light, 
which serves to startle predators and attract prey, and allows 
the fish to communicate with other fish. Some species can 
rotate the organ inside and then out, so the light appears to 
flash on and off. The light is actually emitted by bacteria (of the 
genus Vibrio) that live in the organ in a mutualistic relationship 
with the fish. (The bacteria receive nutrients from the fish.) 
The bacteria must multiply until they reach a certain density 
in the organ (a “quorum”; see Concept 9.1), at which point 
they all begin emitting light at the same time. There is a group 
of six or so genes, called lux genes, whose gene products are 
necessary for light formation. Given that these bacterial genes 
are regulated together, propose a hypothesis for how the genes 
are organized and regulated.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
12. EVOLUTION CONNECTION DNA sequences can act as 
“tape measures of evolution” (see Concept 5.6). Scientists 
analyzing the human genome sequence were surprised to 
find that some of the regions of the human genome that are 
most highly conserved (similar to comparable regions in other 
species) don’t code for proteins. Propose a possible explanation 
for this observation.
13. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Prostate cells usually require 
testosterone and other androgens to survive. But some prostate 
cancer cells thrive despite treatments that eliminate androgens. 
One hypothesis is that estrogen, often considered a female 
hormone, may be activating genes normally controlled by 
an androgen in these cancer cells. Describe one or more 
experiments to test this hypothesis. (See Figure 9.9 to review 
the action of these steroid hormones.)
14. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS In a short 
essay (100–150 words), discuss how the processes shown in 
Figure 18.2 are examples of feedback mechanisms regulating 
biological systems in bacterial cells.
15. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
 CHAPTER 18  Control of Gene Expression 447
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
Can cancer be stopped before it begins?
Go to “Arrested Development: When Cells Make Mistakes” 
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   447 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 449 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C18_PRF.indd   448 14/03/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 450 ===

449
Figure 19.1 This model shows a technique in which a DNA strand is passed through 
a small pore in a membrane. The resulting changes in an electrical current are used to 
determine the nucleotide sequence. The first human genome sequence, completed 
in 2003, took 13 years and cost $1 billion; the time and cost of genome sequencing 
have been greatly reduced by improved methods like the one shown here.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 19
• HHMI Video: Genetic Engineering
• Animation: Creating Recombinant DNA
• HHMI Video: Polymerase Chain  
Reaction (PCR)
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Restriction Enzymes, 
Recombinant DNA, and Gene Cloning
• Activity: Cloning a Gene in Bacteria
19.1 DNA sequencing and DNA cloning 
are valuable tools for genetic 
engineering and biological 
inquiry p. 450
19.2 Biologists use DNA technology 
to study gene expression and 
function p. 457
19.3 Cloned organisms and stem cells 
are useful for basic research and 
other applications p. 462
19.4 The practical applications of DNA-
based biotechnology affect our 
lives in many ways p. 467
KEY CONCEPTS
DNA Technology19
Study Tip
Apply what you’ve learned: Write 
down a gene-related question you’ve 
wondered about. Then make a table 
listing techniques you could use to 
investigate your question and how you 
would apply them. Below is an example.
Is autism caused by genes, the environment, or both?
Technique Application to question
DNA sequencing -Compare DNA sequences
from people with autism with
sequences from nonaffected 
people.
What are the main techniques and 
applications of biotechnology?
DNA sequencing
Expressing genes
Agriculture
Ancestry Forensics
Medicine
Gene editingAnalyzing gene expression
Gene cloning PCR ampli ƂECVion
TECHNIQUES
APPLICATIONS
Environmental cleanup
…GGAGAAGTCTGCCGTTACTGCCCTGTGGGG C…
CCCTGTGGGG
AGTCTGCCGT 
GAGAAGTCTG
GGAGAAGTCT
CCGTTACTGC
RNA sequencing CRISPR-Cas9
42%
23%
Eastern
Europe
Victim Suspect 1 Suspect 2 Crime scene
Western
Africa
Other
regions
Southern
Europe
18%
17%
Protein
Ribosome
A
T
G
C
No. of nucleotides in sequence
1
2
3
4
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   449 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 451 ===

450 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
DNA samples—even a set of numerous fragments represent-
ing an entire genome—are being sequenced.
More and more often, next-generation sequencing is com-
plemented (or in some cases replaced) by “third-generation 
sequencing,” with each new technique being faster and less 
expensive than the previous one. In some new methods, the 
DNA is neither cut into fragments nor amplified. Instead, 
a single, very long DNA molecule is sequenced on its own. 
Several groups have developed techniques that move a 
single strand of a DNA molecule through a very small pore 
(a!nanopore) in a membrane, identifying the bases one by one 
by the distinct way each interrupts an electrical current. One 
model of this concept is shown in Figure 19.1, in which the 
pore is a protein channel embedded in a lipid membrane. 
(Other researchers are using artificial membranes and nano-
pores.) Each type of base interrupts the electrical current for 
a slightly different length of time. In 2015, the first nanopore 
sequencer went on the market; this device is the size of a 
small candy bar and connects to a computer via a USB port. 
Associated software allows immediate identification and 
analysis of the sequence. This is only one of many approaches 
to further increase the rate and cut the cost of sequencing, 
while also allowing the methodology to move out of the labo-
ratory and into the field.
Improved DNA-sequencing techniques have transformed 
the way in which we can explore fundamental biological 
questions about evolution and how life works (see Make 
Connections Figure 5.26). Little more than 15 years after 
the human genome sequence was announced, researchers 
had completed the sequencing of thousands of genomes, 
with tens of thousands in progress. Complete genome 
sequences have been determined for cells from several can-
cers, for ancient humans, and for the many bacteria that 
live in the human intestine. In Chapter 20, you’ll learn 
more about how this rapid acceleration of sequencing tech-
nology has revolutionized our study of the evolution of 
species and the genome itself. Now, let’s consider how indi-
vidual genes are studied.
CONCEPT 19.1
DNA sequencing and DNA 
cloning are valuable tools 
for genetic engineering and 
biological inquiry
The discovery of the structure of the DNA molecule, and 
specifically the recognition that its two strands are comple-
mentary to each other, opened the door for the development 
of DNA sequencing and other techniques for manipulating 
DNA—known as DNA technology—used in biological 
research today. Key to these techniques is nucleic acid 
hybridization, the base pairing of one strand of a nucleic 
acid to a complementary sequence from another nucleic acid 
strand, either DNA or RNA. Nucleic acid hybridization forms 
the foundation of virtually every technique used in genetic 
engineering, the direct manipulation of genes for practical 
purposes. Genetic engineering has launched a revolution in 
fields as varied as criminal law, medicine, and basic biological 
research. In this section, we’ll explore several important tech-
niques and their uses.
DNA Sequencing
Researchers can exploit the principle of complementary base 
pairing to determine the complete nucleotide sequence of 
a DNA molecule, a process called DNA sequencing. The 
first automated procedure, called dideoxy sequencing, was 
developed in the 1970s by biochemist Frederick Sanger, 
who received the Nobel Prize in 1980 for this accomplish-
ment. Dideoxy sequencing is still used for routine small-scale 
sequencing jobs.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Sanger Method  
of DNA Sequencing 
During the first decade of this century, “next-generation 
sequencing” techniques were developed that are rapid and 
inexpensive (Figure 19.2). DNA fragments are amplified 
(copied) to yield an enormous number of identical fragments 
(Figure 19.3). A single template strand of each fragment is 
immobilized, and the complementary strand is synthesized, 
one nucleotide at a time. A chemical technique enables elec-
tronic monitors to identify in real time which of the four 
nucleotides is added; this method is thus called sequencing by 
synthesis. Thousands or hundreds of thousands of fragments, 
each about 300 nucleotides long, are sequenced in parallel in 
machines like those shown in Figure 19.2, accounting for the 
high rate of nucleotides sequenced per hour. This is an exam-
ple of “high-throughput” DNA technology and is currently 
the method of choice for studies where massive numbers of 
. Figure 19.2 Next-generation DNA sequencing machines.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   450 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 452 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 451
/uni25BC Figure 19.3 Research Method
Sequencing by Synthesis: Next-Generation Sequencing
Application In current next-generation sequencing techniques, 
each fragment is about 300 nucleotides long; by sequencing 
the fragments in parallel, about 2 billion nucleotides can be 
sequenced in 24 hours.
Technique S e e  n u m b e r e d  s t e p s  a n d  d i a g r a m s .
Results Each of the 2,000,000 wells in the multiwell plate, 
which holds a different fragment, yields a different sequence. 
The results for one fragment are shown below as a “flow-gram.” 
The sequences of the entire set of fragments are analyzed using 
computer software, which “stitches” them together into a whole 
sequence—here, an entire genome.
A
T
G
C
No. of nucleotides in sequence
1
2
3
4
TTCTGCGAA
INTERPRET THE DATA If the template strand has two or more 
identical nucleotides in a row, their complementary nucleotides will be added 
one after the other in the same flow step. How are two or more of the same 
nucleotide (in a row) detected in the flow-gram? (See sample on the right.) 
Write out the sequence of the first 25 nucleotides in the flow-gram above, 
starting from the left. (Ignore the very short lines.)
1
2
3
The bead is placed into a small well along with
DNA polymerases and primers that can hybridize
to the 3¿ end of the single (template) strand.
4
6
5
In each well, if the next base on the 
template strand (T in this example) is 
complementary to the added 
nucleotide (A, here), the nucleotide 
is joined to the growing strand, 
releasing PPi, which causes a ﬂash of 
light that is recorded.  
7The nucleotide is washed off 
and a different nucleotide (dTTP , 
here) is added. If the nucleotide 
is not complementary to the next 
template base (G, here), it is not 
joined to the strand, no reaction 
occurs, and there is no ﬂash 
8The process of adding and washing off the four 
nucleotides is repeated until every fragment has a 
complete complementary strand. The pattern of 
ﬂashes reveals the sequence of the original fragment 
in each well.
The well is one of 2 million on a multiwell plate, each containing a different DNA 
fragment to be sequenced. A solution of one of the four nucleotides required for 
DNA synthesis (deoxynucleoside triphosphates, or dNTPs)  is added to all wells and 
then washed off. This is done sequentially for all four nucleotides: dATP , dTTP , 
dGTP , and then dCTP . The entire process is then repeated over and over again.
Many copies of each fragment are made 
using a technique called PCR (see Figure 
19.7). One million identical copies are made 
and attached by their 5¿ end to the bead.
C
C
A
A
T
G
T
G
G
A
T
C
C
G
A
A
C
C
A
A
T
G
T
G
G
A
T
C
C
G
A
A
C
ATGCATGCATGC
ATGC
Each fragment is placed in a 
droplet with a bead.
ATGC
dCTPdGTP
dGTP
dTTP
dTTP
Genomic DNA is fragmented, and 
fragments of 300 base pairs are 
selected.
Primer
DNA
polymerase
Bead
Template strand
of DNA
C
C
A
A
T
G
T
G
G
A
T
C
C
G
A
A
Template
strand
of DNA
DNA
polymerase
PPi
PPi
Primer
C
C
A
A
T
G
T
G
G
A
T
C
C
G
A
A
dATP
3¿
5¿3¿5¿
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   451 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 453 ===

452 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Making Multiple Copies of a Gene  
or Other DNA Segment
A molecular biologist studying a particular gene or group of 
genes faces a challenge. Naturally occurring DNA molecules 
are very long, and a single molecule usually carries hundreds 
or even thousands of genes. Moreover, in many eukaryotic 
genomes, protein-coding genes occupy only a small propor-
tion of the chromosomal DNA, the rest being noncoding 
nucleotide sequences. A single human gene, for example, 
might constitute only 1/100,000 of a chromosomal DNA mol-
ecule. As a further complication, it’s not easy to distinguish a 
gene from the surrounding DNA because they differ only in 
nucleotide sequence. To study a specific gene, scientists have 
developed methods to isolate a segment of DNA carrying 
that gene and make multiple identical copies of it—a process 
called DNA cloning.
Most methods for cloning pieces of DNA in the laboratory 
share certain general features. One common approach uses 
bacteria, most often Escherichia coli. Recall from Figure 16.13 
that the E. coli chromosome is a large, circular molecule of 
DNA. In addition, E. coli and many other bacteria also have 
plasmids, small, circular DNA molecules that are replicated 
separately. A plasmid has only a small number of genes; these 
genes may be useful when the bacterium is in a particular 
environment but may not be required for survival or repro-
duction under most conditions.
To clone pieces of DNA using bacteria, scientists have 
isolated plasmids from bacterial cells and altered them by 
genetic engineering. Researchers insert DNA they want to 
study (“foreign” DNA) into the plasmid (Figure 19.4). The 
resulting plasmid is now a recombinant DNA molecule, 
a molecule containing DNA from two different sources, very 
often different species. The plasmid is then returned to a bac-
terial cell, producing a recombinant bacterium. This single cell 
reproduces through repeated cell divisions to form a clone of 
cells, a population of genetically identical cells. Because the 
dividing bacteria replicate the recombinant plasmid and pass 
it on to their descendants, the foreign DNA and any genes it 
carries are cloned at the same time. The production of mul-
tiple copies of a single gene is a type of DNA cloning called 
gene cloning.
In Figure 19.4, the plasmid acts as a cloning vector, a 
DNA molecule that can carry foreign DNA into a host cell and 
be replicated there. Bacterial plasmids are widely used as clon-
ing vectors for several reasons: They can be readily obtained 
from commercial suppliers, manipulated to form recom-
binant plasmids by insertion of foreign DNA in a test tube 
(referred to as in vitro, from the Latin meaning “in glass”), and 
then easily introduced into bacterial cells. The foreign DNA 
in Figure 19.4 is a gene from a eukaryotic cell; we will describe 
in more detail how the foreign DNA segment was obtained 
later in this section.
Recombinant
DNA (plasmid)
Bacterium
Recombinant
bacterium
Cell containing gene
of interest
Human growth hormone 
treats stunted growth
Copies of gene
Gene for pest resistance 
is inserted into plants
Gene is used to alter bacteria 
for cleaning up toxic waste
Protein dissolves blood clots 
in heart attack therapy
Protein harvested
PlasmidBacterial
chromosome
Protein expressed 
from gene of interest
Gene of
interest
Plasmid  put into
bacterial cell
2
Host cell grown in culture to 
form a clone of cells containing 
the ”cloned“ gene of interest
3
Basic research 
and various 
applications
4
Gene inserted 
into plasmid 
(a cloning vector)
1
Gene of
interest
DNA of
chromosome
(”foreign” DNA)
. Figure 19.4 Gene cloning and some uses of cloned genes. 
In this simplified diagram of gene cloning, we start with a plasmid 
(originally isolated from a bacterial cell) and a gene of interest 
from another organism. Only one plasmid and one copy of the 
gene of interest are shown at the top of the figure, but the starting 
materials would include many of each.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Genetic Engineering 
Gene cloning is useful for two basic purposes: to make 
many copies of, or amplify, a particular gene and to produce 
a protein product from it (see Figure 19.4). Researchers can 
isolate copies of a cloned gene from bacteria for use in basic 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   452 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 454 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 453
research or to endow another organism with a new metabolic 
capability, such as pest resistance. For example, a resistance 
gene present in one crop species might be cloned and trans-
ferred into plants of another species. (Such organisms are 
called genetically modified organisms, or GMOs for short; they 
will be discussed later in the chapter.) Alternatively, a protein 
with medical uses, such as human growth hormone, can be 
harvested in large quantities from cultures of bacteria car-
rying a cloned gene for the protein. (We’ll look at the tech-
niques for expressing cloned genes later.) Since one gene is 
only a very small part of the total DNA in a cell, the ability to 
amplify such a DNA fragment is crucial for any application 
involving a single gene.
Using Restriction Enzymes to Make  
a Recombinant DNA Plasmid
Gene cloning and genetic engineering generally rely on the 
use of enzymes that cut DNA molecules at a limited number 
of specific locations. These enzymes, called restriction 
endonucleases, or restriction enzymes, were discovered 
in!the late 1960s by biologists doing basic research on bacte-
ria. Restriction enzymes protect the bacterial cell by cutting 
up foreign DNA from other organisms or phages  
(see Concept 26.2).
Hundreds of different restriction enzymes have been iden-
tified and isolated. Each restriction enzyme is very specific, 
recognizing a particular short DNA sequence, or restriction 
site, and cutting both DNA strands at precise points within 
this restriction site. The DNA of a bacterial cell is protected 
from the cell’s own restriction enzymes by the addition of 
methyl groups (—CH3) to adenines or cytosines within the 
sequences recognized by the enzymes.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Restriction Enzymes
Figure 19.5 shows how restriction enzymes are used to 
clone a foreign DNA fragment into a bacterial plasmid. At the 
top of the figure is a bacterial plasmid (like the one shown in 
Figure 19.4) that has a single restriction site recognized by 
a particular restriction enzyme. As shown in this example, 
most restriction sites are symmetrical. In other words, the 
sequence of nucleotides is the same on both strands when 
read in the 59 S 39 direction. The most commonly used 
restriction enzymes recognize sequences containing four 
to eight nucleotide pairs. Because any sequence that is this 
short usually occurs (by chance) many times in a long DNA 
molecule, a restriction enzyme will make many cuts in such 
a DNA molecule, yielding a set of restriction fragments. 
Since restriction enzymes always cut at the same exact DNA 
sequence, copies of any given DNA molecule exposed to the 
same restriction enzyme always yield the same set of restric-
tion fragments.
G
G
CTTAA
AATTC
G
AATTC
G G
CTTAA
G
C
C
G
Fragment from different
DNA molecule cut by the 
same restriction enzyme
One possible combination
Sticky 
end
Restriction site
Bacterial
plasmid
Recombinant
plasmid
DNA
5¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿ 5¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
3¿
5¿3¿ 5¿3¿
5¿3¿ 5¿3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
5¿
Recombinant DNA molecule
AA T T C
CTT AAG
GAA TT C
CT T A AG
AA TT
TTAA
A restriction enzyme cuts
the sugar-phosphate
backbones at each arrow.
1
A DNA fragment from another
source is added. Base pairing
of sticky ends produces
various combinations.
2
DNA ligase
seals the strands.
3
. Figure 19.5 Using a restriction enzyme and DNA ligase to 
make a recombinant DNA plasmid. The restriction enzyme in this 
example (called EcoRI) recognizes a single six-base-pair restriction 
site present in this plasmid. It makes staggered cuts in the sugar-
phosphate backbones, producing fragments with “sticky ends.” 
Foreign DNA fragments with complementary sticky ends can base-
pair with the plasmid ends; the ligated product is a recombinant 
plasmid. (If the two plasmid sticky ends base-pair, the original 
nonrecombinant plasmid is reformed.)
DRAW IT The restriction enzyme HindIII recognizes the sequence 
5’-AAGCTT-3’, cutting between the two A’s. Draw the double-stranded 
sequence before and after the enzyme cuts it.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Recombinant DNA
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   453 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 455 ===

454 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
The most useful restriction enzymes cleave the sugar-
phosphate backbones in the two DNA strands in a staggered 
manner, as shown in step 1 of Figure 19.5. The resulting 
double-stranded restriction fragments have at least one 
single-stranded end, called a sticky end. These short exten-
sions can form hydrogen-bonded base pairs with comple-
mentary sticky ends on any other DNA molecules cut with 
the same restriction enzyme, such as the inserted DNA 
shown in step 2 of Figure 19.5. The associations formed in 
this way are only temporary but can be made permanent 
by DNA ligase, an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of 
covalent bonds that close up the sugar-phosphate backbones 
of DNA strands (see step 3 of Figure 19.5). At the bottom 
of Figure 19.5, you can see the stable recombinant DNA 
molecule that was produced by the ligase-catalyzed joining 
of DNA from two different sources. The end result, in this 
example, is the formation of a stable recombinant plasmid 
containing foreign DNA.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Creating Recombinant DNA
To check the recombinant plasmids after they have been 
copied many times in host cells to make sure the fragment 
has been inserted (see Figure 19.4), a researcher might cut 
the products again using the same restriction enzyme. If the 
insert is there, there would be two DNA fragments, one the 
size of the plasmid and one the size of the inserted DNA. To 
separate and visualize the fragments, researchers carry out 
a technique called gel electrophoresis, which uses a gel 
made of a polymer that has microscopic holes of different 
sizes, through which shorter fragments can travel faster. The 
gel works as a molecular sieve to separate out a mixture of 
nucleic acid fragments by length (Figure 19.6). Gel electro-
phoresis is used!in conjunction with many different tech-
niques in molecular biology.
Amplifying DNA: The Polymerase  
Chain Reaction (PCR) and Its Use  
in DNA Cloning
Now that we have examined the cloning vector in some 
detail, let’s consider how biologists obtain the foreign DNA 
to be inserted. Most researchers have some sequence infor-
mation about the DNA fragment they want to clone. Using 
this information, they can start with genomic DNA from the 
particular species of interest and obtain many copies of the 
desired gene by using a technique called the polymerase 
chain reaction, or PCR. Figure 19.7 illustrates the steps in 
PCR. Within a few hours, this technique can make billions 
of!copies of a specific target DNA segment in a sample, even 
if!that segment makes up less than 0.001% of the total DNA in 
the sample.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Polymerase  
Chain Reaction (PCR) 
Power
source
– +
Mixture of DNA
molecules of
different
lengths
Cathode Anode
Gel
Wells
Direction of movement
of DNA molecules
Wells
(a)Each sample, a mixture of different DNA molecules, is placed in 
a separate well near one end of a thin slab of agarose gel. The 
gel is set into a small plastic support and immersed in an
aqueous, buffered solution in a tray with electrodes at each end. 
The current is then turned on, causing the negatively charged 
DNA molecules to move toward the positive electrode.
(b)Shorter molecules are slowed down less than longer molecules, 
so shorter molecules move faster through the gel. After the 
current is turned off, a DNA-binding dye is added that ﬂuoresces 
pink in ultraviolet (UV) light. Each pink band corresponds to 
many thousands of DNA molecules of the same length. The 
bands at the upper and lower edges of the gel are restriction 
fragments of standard lengths for comparison with samples of 
unknown length.
Restriction 
fragments
of standard 
lengths
Restriction 
fragments of 
unknown 
lengths
Restriction 
fragments of 
standard 
lengths
. Figure 19.6 Gel electrophoresis. A gel made of a polymer 
acts!as a molecular sieve to separate nucleic acids or proteins 
differing in size, electrical charge, or other physical properties as 
they move in an electric field. In the example shown here, DNA 
molecules are separated by length in a gel made of a polysaccharide 
called agarose.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Gel Electrophoresis of DNA
In the PCR procedure, a three-step cycle causes a chain 
reaction that produces an exponentially growing population 
of identical DNA molecules. During each cycle, the reac-
tion mixture is 1 heated to high temperatures to denature 
(separate) the strands of the double-stranded DNA and then 
2 cooled to allow annealing (hydrogen bonding) of short, 
single-stranded DNA primers complementary to sequences 
on opposite strands at each end of the target sequence; 
finally, 3 a special DNA polymerase extends the primers 
in the 59 S 39 direction. This cycle is then repeated 30–40 
times. If a standard DNA polymerase were used, this enzyme 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   454 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 456 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 455
would be denatured along with the DNA during 
the first heating step and would have to be replaced 
after each cycle. The key to automating PCR was 
the discovery of an unusual heat-stable DNA poly-
merase enzyme called Taq polymerase, named after 
the bacterial species from which it was first isolated. 
This bacterial species, Thermus aquaticus, lives in 
hot springs, and the stability of its DNA polymerase 
at high temperatures is an evolutionary adaptation 
that enables the enzyme to function at tempera-
tures up to 95°C. Today, researchers also use a DNA 
polymerase from the archaean species Pyrococcus 
furiosus. This enzyme, called Pfu polymerase, is 
more accurate and stable but more expensive than 
Taq polymerase.
PCR is speedy and very specific. Only a minus-
cule amount of DNA need be present in the starting 
material, and this DNA can be partially degraded,  
as long as there are a few copies of the complete 
target sequence. The key to the high specificity is  
the pair of primers used for each PCR amplifica-
tion. The primer sequences are chosen so that they 
hybridize only to sequences at opposite ends of the  
target segment, one on the 39 end of each strand. 
(For high specificity, the primers must be at least  
15 nucleotides long.) With each successive cycle, the 
number of target segment molecules of the correct 
length doubles, so the number of molecules equals 
2n, where n is the number of cycles. After 30 or so 
cycles, about a billion copies of the target sequence 
are present!
Despite its speed and specificity, PCR amplifi-
cation cannot substitute for gene cloning in cells 
to make large amounts of a gene. This is because 
the polymerases that are used have no proofread-
ing function, and occasional errors during PCR 
replication limit the number of good copies and 
the length of DNA fragments that can be copied. 
Instead, PCR is used to provide the specific DNA 
fragment for cloning. PCR primers are synthesized 
to include a restriction site at each end of the DNA 
fragment that matches the site in the cloning vec-
tor, and the fragment and vector are cut and ligated 
together (Figure 19.8). The resulting plasmids are 
sequenced so that those with error-free inserts can 
be selected.
Devised in 1985, PCR has had a major impact on 
biological research and genetic engineering. PCR 
has been used to amplify DNA from a wide variety of 
sources: a 40,000-year-old frozen woolly mammoth; 
fingerprints or tiny amounts of blood, tissue, or 
semen found at crime scenes; single embryonic cells 
for rapid prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders (see 
Figure 14.19); and cells infected with viruses that are  Mastering Biology Animation: Copying DNA Through PCR
The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
/uni25BC Figure 19.7 Research Method
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
5¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
Target
sequence
Genomic DNA
PrimersCycle 1
yields
2 
molecules
Cycle 2
yields
4 
molecules
Cycle 3
2 of the 8 
molecules
(in white boxes)
match the target
sequence
 and are the 
right length
New
nucleo-
tides
Denaturation:
*eat brieﬂy
to separate
DNA strands.
1
Annealing:
Cool to allow
primers to form
hydrogen bonds 
with ends of 
target sequence.
2
Extension:
DNA polymerase
adds nucleotides
to the 3¿ end of
each primer.
3
Results After three cycles, two molecules match the target sequence 
exactly. After 30 more cycles, over 1 billion (109) molecules match.
Application With PCR, any specific segment—the so-called target 
sequence—in a DNA sample can be copied many times (amplified) 
within a test tube.
Technique PCR requires double-stranded DNA containing the target 
sequence, a heat-resistant DNA polymerase, all four nucleotides, and two 
15- to 20-nucleotide single DNA strands that serve as primers. One!primer 
is complementary to one end of the target sequence on one strand; the 
second primer is complementary to the 
other end of  
the sequence on 
the other strand.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   455 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 457 ===

456 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(see Concept 17.2), scientists usually employ an expression 
vector, a cloning vector that contains a highly active bacte-
rial promoter just upstream of a restriction site where the 
eukaryotic gene can be inserted in the correct reading frame. 
The bacterial host cell will recognize the promoter and pro-
ceed to express the foreign gene now linked to that promoter. 
Such expression vectors allow the synthesis of many eukary-
otic proteins in bacterial cells.
Another problem with expressing cloned eukaryotic genes 
in bacteria is the presence of noncoding regions (introns) in 
most eukaryotic genes (see Concept 17.3). Introns can make 
a eukaryotic gene very long and unwieldy, and they prevent 
correct expression of the gene by bacterial cells, which do 
not have RNA-splicing machinery. This problem can be 
surmounted by using a form of the gene that includes only 
the exons. (This is called complementary DNA, or cDNA; see 
Figure 19.10.)
Eukaryotic DNA Cloning and Expression Systems
Molecular biologists can avoid eukaryotic-bacterial incom-
patibility by using eukaryotic cells such as yeasts as hosts for 
cloning and expressing eukaryotic genes. Yeasts, single-celled 
fungi, are as easy to grow as bacteria, and they have plasmids, 
a rarity among eukaryotes.
In addition to enabling RNA splicing, eukaryotic host  
cells are advantageous because many eukaryotic proteins  
will not function unless they are modified after translation— 
for example, by the addition of carbohydrate groups 
(glycosylation) or lipid groups in the ER and Golgi. 
Bacterial cells lack membrane-bound organelles and can-
not carry out these modifications, and if the gene product 
requiring such processing is from a mammalian gene, even 
yeast cells may not be able to modify the protein correctly. 
Several cultured cell types have proved successful as host 
cells for this purpose, including some mammalian cell 
lines and an insect cell line that can be infected by a virus 
carrying recombinant!DNA.
Scientists have developed other methods for introducing 
recombinant DNA into eukaryotic cells. In electroporation,  
a brief electrical pulse applied to a solution containing 
cells creates temporary holes in their plasma membranes, 
through which DNA can enter. (This technique is now com-
monly used for bacteria as well.) Alternatively, scientists 
can inject DNA directly into single eukaryotic cells using 
microscopically thin needles. Another way to get DNA 
into plant cells is by using the soil bacterium Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens, as we’ll see later. Whatever the method, if the 
introduced DNA is incorporated into a cell’s genome by 
genetic recombination, then it can be stably expressed by 
the cell. Expressing different versions of genes in cells allows 
researchers to study protein function, a topic we’ll return to 
in Concept 19.2.
The PCR primers are 
designed so that the 
DNA fragments 
obtained by PCR 
have, at each end, a 
restriction site 
matching the one in 
the cloning vector.
Recombinant DNA plasmids 
are added to bacterial host 
cells, which are then treated 
with antibiotic. Only cells that 
take up a plasmid will survive, 
due to the antibiotic 
resistance gene.
Mix and ligate
Cloning vector
(bacterial plasmid)
Recombinant
DNA plasmid
A gene that 
makes 
bacterial cells 
resistant to an 
antibiotic is 
present on the 
plasmid.
Cut with same
restriction 
enzyme
used on cloning 
vector
. Figure 19.8 Use of a restriction enzyme and PCR in gene 
cloning. In a closer look at the process shown at the top of Figure 
19.4, PCR is used to produce the DNA fragment or gene of interest 
that will be ligated into a cloning vector, in this case a bacterial 
plasmid.
difficult to detect, such as HIV. (To test for HIV, viral genes are 
amplified.) We’ll return to applications of PCR later.
Expressing Cloned Eukaryotic Genes
Once a gene has been cloned in host cells, its protein product 
can be expressed in large amounts for research or for practical 
applications, which we’ll explore in Concept 19.4. Cloned 
genes can be expressed in either bacterial or eukaryotic cells; 
each option has advantages and disadvantages.
Bacterial Expression Systems
Getting a cloned eukaryotic gene to function in bacterial host 
cells can be difficult because certain aspects of gene expres-
sion are different in eukaryotes and bacteria. To overcome 
differences in promoters and other DNA control sequences 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   456 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 458 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 457
Biologists use DNA technology to 
study gene expression and function
To see how a biological system works, scientists seek to 
understand the functioning of the system’s component 
parts. Analysis of when and where a gene or group of genes is 
expressed can provide important clues about their function 
and how they contribute to the organism as a whole.
Analyzing Gene Expression
Biologists driven to understand the assorted cell types of 
a multicellular organism, cancer cells, or the developing 
tissues of an embryo first try to discover which genes are 
expressed by the cells of interest. The most straightforward 
way to do this is usually to identify the mRNAs being made. 
We’ll first examine techniques that look for patterns of 
expression of specific individual genes. Next, we’ll explore 
ways to characterize groups of genes being expressed by cells 
or tissues of interest. As you will see, all of these procedures 
depend in some way on base pairing between complemen-
tary nucleotide sequences.
Studying the Expression of Single Genes
Suppose we have cloned a gene that we suspect plays an 
important role in the embryonic development of Drosophila 
melanogaster (the fruit fly). The first thing we might wonder 
is which embryonic cells express the gene—in other words, 
where in the embryo is the corresponding mRNA found? 
We can detect the mRNA in an embryonic sample using 
nucleic acid hybridization with molecules of complementary 
sequence to the mRNA we want to follow. Using our cloned 
gene as a template, we can synthesize a short, single-stranded 
nucleic acid (either RNA or DNA) complementary to the 
mRNA of interest; this is called a nucleic acid probe. For 
example, if part of the sequence on the mRNA were
…CUCAUCACCGGC …5¿ 3¿
then we would synthesize this single-stranded DNA probe:
GAGTAGTGGCCG 5¿3¿
Each probe molecule is labeled during synthesis with a fluo-
rescent tag so we can follow it. A solution containing probe 
molecules is applied to Drosophila embryos, allowing the 
probe to hybridize specifically with any complementary 
sequences on the many mRNAs in embryonic cells in which 
the gene is being transcribed. Because this technique allows 
us to see the mRNA in place (or in situ, in Latin) in the intact 
organism, this technique is called in situ hybridization. 
Cross-Species Gene Expression and  
Evolutionary Ancestry
EVOLUTION The ability to express eukaryotic proteins in 
bacteria (even if the proteins can’t be modified properly) is 
quite remarkable when we consider how different eukaryotic 
and bacterial cells are. In fact, examples abound of genes 
that are taken from one species and function perfectly well 
when transferred into another very different species, such as 
a firefly gene in a tobacco plant and a jellyfish gene in a pig 
(see!Figure 17.7). These observations underscore the shared 
evolutionary ancestry of species living today.
One example involves a gene called Pax-6, which has 
been found in animals as diverse as vertebrates and fruit 
flies. The vertebrate Pax-6 gene product (the PAX-6 protein) 
triggers a complex program of gene expression resulting 
in formation of the vertebrate eye, which has a single lens. 
Expression of the fly Pax-6 gene leads to formation of the 
compound fly eye, which is quite different from the ver-
tebrate eye. When the mouse Pax-6 gene was cloned and 
introduced into a fly embryo so that it replaced the fly’s own 
Pax-6 gene, researchers were surprised to see that the mouse 
version of the gene led to formation of a compound fly eye 
(see Figure!50.16). Conversely, when the fly Pax-6 gene was 
transferred into a vertebrate embryo—a frog, in this case—a 
frog eye formed. Although the genetic programs triggered 
in vertebrates and flies generate very different eyes, the two 
versions of the Pax-6 gene can substitute for each other to 
trigger lens development, evidence of their evolution from 
a gene in a very ancient common ancestor. Because of their 
ancient evolutionary roots, all living organisms share the 
same basic mechanisms of gene expression. This common-
ality is the basis of many recombinant DNA techniques 
described in this!chapter.
CONCEPT CHECK 19.1
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS The restriction site for an enzyme 
called PvuI is the following sequence:
5’-CGATCG-3’
3’-GCTAGC-5’
Staggered cuts are made between the T and C on each 
strand. What type of bonds are being cleaved? (See 
Concept!5.5.)
2. DRAW IT One strand of a DNA molecule has the following 
sequence:
5’-CTTGACGATCGTTACCG-3’
Draw the other strand. Will PvuI (see question 1) cut this 
molecule? If so, draw the products.
3. What are some potential difficulties in using plasmid vec-
tors and bacterial host cells to produce large quantities of 
proteins from cloned eukaryotic genes?
4. VISUAL SKILLS Compare Figure 19.7 with Figure 16.21. How 
does replication of DNA ends during PCR proceed without 
shortening the fragments each time?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 19.2
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   457 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 459 ===

458 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Reverse transcrip-
tase is added to a
test tube containing
mRNAs, isolated from 
a sample of cells.
1
Reverse transcrip-
tase makes the first
DNA strand using
the mRNA as a tem-
plate and a short 
poly-dT as a DNA primer.
2
DNA polymerase
synthesizes the
second DNA strand,
using a primer in the
reaction mixture.
(Several options 
exist for primers.)
4
The result is cDNA,
 which carries the
complete coding
sequence of the
gene but no introns.
5
mRNA is degraded
by another enzyme.
3
DNA in 
nucleus
mRNAs in
cytoplasm
5¿
mRNA
Reverse
transcriptase Poly-A tail
Primer
(poly-dT)
DNA
strand
DNA
polymerase
cDNA
3¿
5¿
AAAAA
TTTTT
A
5¿
3¿
5¿
3¿ 5¿
5¿
3¿ 5¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
3¿
5¿
AAA AA
TTTTT
A
. Figure 19.10 Making complementary DNA (cDNA) from 
eukaryotic genes. Complementary DNA is made in a test tube 
using mRNA as a template for the first strand. Only one mRNA is 
shown after step 1, but the final collection of cDNAs would reflect 
all the mRNAs present in the cell.
Head Thorax Abdomen
wg mRNA en mRNA
Cells
expressing
the en gene
Cells
expressing
the wg gene
The yellow DNA probe hybrid-
izes with mRNAs in cells that 
are expressing the wingless 
(wg) gene, which encodes a 
secreted signaling protein.
The blue DNA probe hybrid-
izes with mRNAs in cells that 
are expressing the engrailed 
(en) gene, which encodes a 
transcription factor.
3¿ 5¿
5¿ 3¿
3¿ 5¿
5¿ 3¿
50 om
TAACGGTTCCAG
AUUGCCAAGGUC
TCAAGTTGCTCT
AGUUCAACGAGA …………
. Figure 19.9 Determining where single genes are expressed 
by in situ hybridization analysis. This Drosophila embryo was 
incubated in a solution containing DNA probes for five different 
mRNAs, each probe labeled with a different fluorescently colored tag. 
The embryo was then viewed using fluorescence microscopy. Each 
color marks where a specific gene is expressed as mRNA. The arrows 
from the groups of yellow and blue cells above the micrograph show 
a magnified view of nucleic acid hybridization of the appropriately 
colored probe to the mRNA. The thorax (trunk) and abdomen 
are made up of repeating segments. Yellow cells (expressing the 
wg gene) interact with blue cells (expressing the en gene); their 
interaction helps establish the pattern in a body segment.
Different probes can be labeled with different fluorescent 
dyes, sometimes with strikingly beautiful results (Figure 19.9).
Other mRNA detection techniques may be preferable for 
comparing the amounts of a specific mRNA in several samples 
at the same time—for example, in different cell types or in 
embryos of different stages. One method that is widely used 
is called the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction, or RT-PCR.
RT-PCR begins by turning sample sets of mRNAs into 
double-stranded DNAs with the corresponding sequences. 
First, the enzyme reverse transcriptase (from a retrovirus; 
see Figure!26.9) is used to synthesize a complementary 
DNA copy (a reverse transcript) of each mRNA in the sample 
(Figure!19.10). The mRNA is then degraded by addition of a 
specific enzyme, and a second DNA strand, complementary 
to the first, is synthesized by DNA polymerase. The result-
ing double-stranded DNA is called complementary DNA 
(cDNA). (Made from mRNA, cDNA lacks introns and can be 
used for protein expression in bacteria, as mentioned earlier.) 
To analyze the timing of expression of the Drosophila gene 
of interest, for example, we would first isolate all the mRNAs 
from different stages of Drosophila embryos and make cDNA 
from each stage (Figure 19.11).
Next in RT-PCR is the PCR step (see Figure 19.7). As you 
will recall, PCR is a way of rapidly making many copies of 
one specific stretch of double-stranded DNA, using prim-
ers that hybridize to the opposite ends of the segment that 
we are interested in studying. In our case, we would add 
primers corresponding to a segment of our Drosophila gene, 
using the cDNA from each embryonic stage as a template for 
PCR amplification in separate samples. When the products 
are analyzed on a gel, copies of the amplified region will be 
observed as bands only in samples that originally contained 
mRNA from the gene being studied. This method can tell 
researchers whether an mRNA is present. However, accurate 
measurement of mRNA levels requires newer, more quantita-
tive PCR machines that use a dye that fluoresces only when 
bound to a double-stranded PCR product. This technique, 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   458 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 460 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 459
the genomes of a number of species have been sequenced, it is 
possible to study the expression of large groups of genes—an 
approach called the systems approach. Researchers use what is 
known about the whole genome to investigate which genes 
are transcribed in different tissues or at different stages of 
development. One aim is to identify networks of gene expres-
sion across an entire genome.
To accomplish such genome-wide expression studies, 
today’s rapid, inexpensive DNA-sequencing methods allow 
researchers to discover which genes are expressed by simply 
sequencing the cDNA samples from different tissues or dif-
ferent embryonic stages. This straightforward method is 
called RNA sequencing, or RNA-seq (pronounced “RNA-
seek”), even though it is the cDNA that is actually sequenced. 
In RNA-seq, the mRNA (or other RNA) samples are isolated, 
cut into shorter, similar-sized fragments, and converted 
into cDNAs (Figure 19.12). These short cDNA stretches are 
sequenced, and a computer program reassembles them, 
either mapping them onto the genome of the species in 
question (when available) or simply putting the fragments 
in!order from scratch based on overlapping sequences of 
multiple RNAs.
called quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), can detect the light and 
measure the PCR product, thus avoiding the need for electro-
phoresis while providing quantitative data, a distinct advan-
tage. RT-PCR or qRT-PCR can also be carried out with mRNAs 
collected from different tissues at one time to discover which 
tissue is producing a specific mRNA.
 Instructors: The Scientific Skills Exercise “ Analyzing Quantitative 
and Spatial Gene Expression Data” can be assigned in 
Mastering Biology. Students can work with data from an 
experiment that investigated mRNA expression using both  
in situ hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR.
Studying the Expression of Interacting  
Groups of Genes
A major goal of biologists is to learn how genes act together 
to produce and maintain a functioning organism. Now that 
     mRNAs are 
isolated from 
the tissue 
being studied. 
     mRNAs are 
cut into similar-
sized, small 
fragments.
     mRNAs are 
reverse-transcribed 
into cDNAs of the 
same size.
     cDNAs are 
sequenced.
     The short sequences 
are mapped by 
computer onto the 
genome sequence. The 
resulting data, including 
the number of times a 
sequence is present, 
indicate which genes 
are expressed in a given 
tissue and at what level. 
…GGAGAAGTCTGCCGTTACTGCCCTGTGGGGC…
CCCTGTGGGG
CCCTGTGGGG
AGTCTGCCGT 
AGTCTGCCGT 
GAGAAGTCTG
GAGAAGTCTG
GGAGAAGTCT
GGAGAAGTCT
CCGTTACTGC
CCGTTACTGC
Genome sequence
1
2
3
4
5
. Figure 19.12 Use of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to analyze 
expression of many genes. RNA-seq yields a wide range of 
information about expression of genes, including their level of 
expression.
/uni25BC Figure 19.11 Research Method
RT-PCR Analysis of the Expression of Single Genes
Application RT-PCR uses the enzyme reverse transcriptase 
(RT) in combination with PCR and gel electrophoresis. RT-PCR 
can be used to compare gene expression between samples—
for instance, in different embryonic stages, in different tis-
sues, or in the same type of cell under different conditions.
Technique In this example, samples containing mRNAs 
from six embryonic stages of Drosophila were analyzed for a 
specific mRNA as shown below. (In steps 1 and 2, the mRNA 
from only one stage is shown.)
1cDNA synthesis is carried out by 
incubating the mRNAs from each 
stage with reverse transcriptase 
and other necessary components.
2PCR ampliƂECVion is then  
performed using primers 
speciƂc to the Drosophila 
gene of interest to see 
whether its mRNA was 
present in each sample.
3Gel electroRJoresis will 
reveal ampliƂed &0# 
products only in samples 
that contained mRNA 
transcribed from the 
speciƂc Drosophila gene.
mRNAs
Primers
1 65432
Embryonic stages
SpeciƂc 
gene
c&0#s
Results The mRNA for this gene is expressed from stage 2 
through stage 6. The size of the amplified fragment (shown 
by its position on the gel) depends on the distance between 
the primers that were used (not on the size of the mRNA).
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   459 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 461 ===

460 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Scientists can now measure the expression of thousands of 
genes at one time. DNA technology makes such studies pos-
sible; with automation, they are easily performed on a large 
scale. By uncovering gene interactions and providing clues 
to gene function, DNA microarray assays and RNA-seq may 
contribute to a better understanding of diseases and suggest 
new diagnostic techniques or therapies. For instance, com-
paring patterns of gene expression in breast cancer tumors 
and noncancerous breast tissue has already resulted in more 
informed and effective treatment protocols (see Figure!18.27). 
Ultimately, information from these methods should provide 
a grander view of how ensembles of genes interact to form an 
organism and maintain its vital systems.
Determining Gene Function
Once they identify a gene of interest, how do scientists deter-
mine its function? A gene’s sequence can be compared with 
sequences in other species. If the function of a similar gene 
in another species is known, one might suspect that the gene 
product in question performs a comparable task. Data about 
the location and timing of gene expression may reinforce 
the suggested function. To obtain stronger evidence, one 
approach is to disable the gene and then observe the conse-
quences in the cell or organism.
Editing Genes and Genomes
Molecular biologists have long sought techniques for alter-
ing, or editing, the genetic material of cells or organisms in 
a predictable way. In one such technique, called in vitro 
mutagenesis, specific mutations are introduced into a 
cloned gene, and the mutated gene is returned to a cell in 
such a way that it disables (“knocks out”) the normal cellular 
copies of the same gene. If the introduced mutations alter or 
destroy the function of the gene product, the phenotype of 
the mutant cell may help reveal the function of the missing 
normal protein.
In Concept 17.5, you read about the CRISPR-Cas9 
system, the powerful new technique for gene editing 
in living cells and organisms that is taking the field of 
genetic engineering by storm (see Figure 17.28). This sys-
tem, worked out by Jennifer Doudna (Figure 19.14) and 
Emmanuelle Charpentier, is a highly effective way for 
researchers to knock out a given gene in order to study what 
that gene does. It has already been used in many organ-
isms, including bacteria, fish, mice, insects, human cells, 
and various crop plants. Modifications of the technique 
allow researchers to!repair a gene that has a mutation. This 
approach is used for gene therapy, which will be discussed 
later in the chapter.
In another application of the CRISPR-Cas9 system, 
scientists are attempting to address the global problem of 
insect-borne diseases by altering genes in insects so that, 
Several characteristics make RNA-seq a powerful tech-
nique. First, it is not based on hybridization with a labeled 
probe, so it doesn’t depend on knowing genomic sequences. 
Second, it can measure levels of expression over a very wide 
range. Third, a careful analysis provides a wealth of informa-
tion about expression of a particular gene, such as relative 
levels of alternatively spliced mRNAs. In most cases, how-
ever, expression of individual genes still needs to be con-
firmed by RT-PCR.
An older method of genome-wide expression studies, 
called DNA microarray assays, is less powerful than 
RNA-seq but is still used for some applications, such as fetal 
testing (see Figure 14.19). A DNA microarray consists of tiny 
amounts of a large number of single-stranded DNA frag-
ments representing different genes fixed to a glass slide in a 
tightly spaced array, or grid, of dots. (The microarray is also 
called a DNA chip by analogy to a computer chip.) Ideally, 
these fragments represent all the genes of an organism. The 
mRNAs from the cells being studied are reverse-transcribed 
into cDNAs (see Figure!19.10), and a fluorescent label is 
added so the cDNAs can be used as probes on the microar-
ray. Different fluorescent labels are used for different cell 
samples so that multiple samples can be tested in the same 
experiment. The resulting pattern of colored dots, shown in 
an actual-size microarray in Figure 19.13, reveals the dots 
to which each probe was bound and thus the genes that are 
expressed in the cell samples being tested.
. DNA microarray (actual 
size). Each dot is a well 
containing identical 
copies of DNA 
fragments that carry 
a speciƂc gene
Genes that were not 
expressed in either tissue 
do not bind either cDNA; 
these wells appear black.
Genes that were 
expressed in tissue 1 
bind to red cDNAs 
made from mRNAs in 
that tissue.
Genes that were 
expressed in tissue 2 
bind to green cDNAs. 
Genes that were 
expressed in both tissues 
bind both red and green 
cDNAs; these wells 
appear yellow.
cDNA
. Figure 19.13 Use of microarrays to analyze expression of 
many genes. Researchers extracted mRNAs from two different 
human tissues and synthesized two sets of cDNAs, fluorescently 
labeled red (tissue 1) or green (tissue 2). Labeled cDNAs were 
hybridized with a microarray containing 5,760 human genes (about 
25% of human genes), part of which is shown in the enlargement. 
Red indicates that the gene in that well was expressed in tissue!1, 
green in tissue 2, yellow in both, and black in neither. The fluorescence 
intensity at each spot indicates the relative expression of the gene.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   460 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 462 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 461
population. In a gene, such sequence variation is the basis 
of different alleles, as we have seen for sickle-cell disease 
(see!Figure 17.26). And just like the coding sequences of 
genes, noncoding DNA at a specific locus on a chromosome 
may exhibit small nucleotide differences among individuals. 
Variations in coding or noncoding DNA sequences among 
a population are called polymorphisms (from the Greek for 
“many forms”).
Among the most useful genetic markers in tracking down 
genes that contribute to diseases and disorders are single 
base-pair variations in the genomes of the human popula-
tion. For more than 99% of the nucleotides in the human 
genome, virtually all people have the same nucleotide in 
each position. However, once in every 100–300 base pairs of 
both coding and noncoding DNA sequences are positions 
where the sequence varies between individuals. A single 
base-pair site where variation is found in at least 1% of the 
population is called a single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP, pronounced “snip”); a few million SNPs occur in  
the human genome. To find SNPs in large numbers of 
people, it isn’t necessary to sequence their DNA; SNPs can 
be detected by very sensitive microarray assays, RNA-seq,  
or PCR.
Once a SNP is identified that is found in all people affected 
by the disease being studied, researchers focus on that region 
and sequence it. In nearly all cases, the SNP itself does not 
contribute directly to the disease in question by altering the 
encoded protein; in fact, most SNPs are in noncoding regions. 
Instead, having a particular SNP associated with a disease 
suggests that the gene whose mutation causes the disease 
is located very close to that SNP on that chromosome. This 
closeness (genetic linkage; see Concept 15.3) means that cross-
ing over between the SNP and the gene is very unlikely during 
gamete formation. Therefore, the SNP and gene are almost 
always inherited together, so the SNP acts as a genetic marker 
for the disease-causing allele (Figure 19.15). SNPs have been 
for example, they cannot transmit disease. An extra twist 
to this approach is to engineer the new allele so that it is 
much more highly favored for inheritance than the wild-
type allele. This technology is called a gene drive because 
the biased inheritance of the engineered gene during 
reproduction rapidly “drives” the new allele through the 
population.
Other Methods for Studying Gene Function
Another method for silencing expression of selected genes! 
doesn’t alter the genome; instead, it exploits the phenomenon 
of RNA interference (RNAi), described in!Concept!18.3. 
This experimental approach uses synthetic double-stranded 
RNA molecules matching the sequence of a particular gene to 
trigger breakdown of the gene’s messenger RNA or to block 
its translation. In organisms such as the nematode and the 
fruit fly, RNAi has already proved valuable for analyzing the 
functions of genes on a large scale. This method is quicker 
than using the CRISPR-Cas9 system, but it leads to only a tem-
porary reduction of gene expression rather than a permanent 
gene knockout or alteration.
In humans, ethical considerations prohibit knocking out 
genes to determine their functions. An alternative approach 
is to analyze the genomes of large numbers of people with 
a certain phenotypic condition or disease, such as heart 
disease or diabetes, to try to find differences they all share 
compared with people without that condition. The logic is 
that these differences may be associated with one or more 
malfunctioning genes and thus in a sense are naturally 
occurring gene knockouts. In these large-scale analyses, 
called genome-wide association studies, researchers 
look for genetic markers, DNA sequences that vary in the 
. Figure 19.14 Jennifer Doudna holding a model of 
CRISPR-Cas9.
Disease-associated
allele
SNP linked to normal alleleSNP linked to disease-associated allele
Normal allele
T
A
G
CDNA
. Figure 19.15 Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as 
genetic markers for disease-associated alleles. This diagram 
depicts the same region of the genome from two groups of 
individuals, one group having a particular disease or condition with 
a genetic basis. Unaffected people have an AT pair at a given SNP 
locus, while affected people have a CG pair there. Once the allele 
is confirmed as being associated with the disease in question, the 
SNP that varies in this way can be used as a marker for the disease-
associated allele.
 Mastering  Biology H H M I  V i d e o :  J e n n i f e r  D o u d n a :   
CRISPR-Cas Proteins are the Swiss Army Knife  
of the Genome
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   461 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 463 ===

462 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
the process of differentiation (see Concept 18.4). One way 
to answer this question is to see whether a differentiated  
cell can generate a whole organism—in other words, 
whether cloning an organism is possible. Let’s discuss these 
early experiments before we consider more recent progress 
in organismal cloning and procedures for producing  
stem cells.
Cloning Plants: Single-Cell Cultures
The successful cloning of whole plants from single differenti-
ated cells was accomplished at Cornell University during the 
1950s by F. C. Steward and his students, who worked with 
carrot plants. They found that differentiated cells taken from 
the root (the carrot) and incubated in culture medium could 
grow into normal adult plants, each genetically identical to 
the parent plant. These results showed that differentiation 
does not necessarily involve irreversible changes in the DNA. 
In plants, mature cells can “dedifferentiate” and then give 
rise to all the specialized cell types of the organism; any cell 
with this potential is said to be totipotent.
Plant cloning is used extensively in agriculture. For plants 
such as orchids, cloning is the only commercially practical 
means of producing new plants. In other cases, cloning has 
been used to reproduce a plant with valuable characteristics, 
such as resistance to plant pathogens. In fact, you yourself 
may be a plant cloner: If you have ever grown a new plant 
from a cutting, you have practiced cloning!
Cloning Animals: Nuclear Transplantation
Differentiated cells from animals generally do not divide 
in culture, much less develop into the multiple cell types 
of a new organism. Therefore, early researchers had to use 
a different approach to answer the question of whether 
differentiated animal cells are totipotent. Their approach 
was to remove the nucleus of an egg (creating an enucle-
ated egg) and replace it with the nucleus of a differentiated 
cell, a procedure called nuclear transplantation, now more 
commonly called somatic cell nuclear transfer. If the nucleus 
from the differentiated donor cell retains its full genetic 
potential, then it should be able to direct development of 
the recipient cell into all the tissues and organs of an organ-
ism. Such experiments were conducted on one species of 
frog (Rana pipiens) by Robert Briggs and Thomas King in 
the 1950s and on another frog species (Xenopus laevis) by 
John Gurdon in the 1970s (Figure!19.16). These research-
ers transplanted a nucleus from an embryonic or tadpole 
cell into an enucleated egg of the same species. In Gurdon’s 
experiments, the transplanted nucleus was often able to 
support normal development of the egg into a tadpole. 
However, he found that the potential of a transplanted 
nucleus to direct normal development was inversely related 
found that correlate with diabetes, heart disease, and several 
types of cancer, and the search is on for genes that might 
be involved in these and other conditions that are based 
on!genetics.
The experimental approaches you have learned about thus 
far focus on working with molecules, mainly DNA and pro-
teins. In a parallel line of inquiry, biologists have been devel-
oping powerful techniques for cloning whole multicellular 
organisms. One aim of this work is to obtain special types of 
cells, called stem cells, that can give rise to all types of tissues. 
Being able to manipulate stem cells would allow scientists 
to use the DNA-based methods previously discussed to alter 
stem cells for the treatment of diseases. Methods involving 
the cloning of organisms and production of stem cells are the 
subject of the next section.
CONCEPT CHECK 19.2
1. Describe the role of complementary base pairing during 
RT-PCR, RNA sequencing, and DNA microarray analysis.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Consider the microarray in Figure 19.13. If a 
sample from normal tissue is labeled with a green fluorescent 
dye and a sample from cancerous tissue is labeled red, what 
color spots would represent genes you would be interested in 
if you were studying cancer? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 19.3
Cloned organisms and stem cells 
are useful for basic research and 
other applications
Along with advances in DNA technology, scientists have been 
developing and refining methods for cloning whole multi-
cellular organisms from single cells. In this context, cloning 
produces one or more organisms that are genetically identi-
cal to the “parent” that donated the single cell. This is often 
called organismal cloning to differentiate it from gene cloning 
and, more significantly, from cell cloning—the division of an 
asexually reproducing cell such as a bacterium into a group 
of genetically identical cells. (The common theme is that the 
product is genetically identical to the parent.) The current 
interest in organismal cloning is primarily due to its ability to 
generate stem cells. A stem cell is a relatively unspecialized 
cell that can both reproduce itself indefinitely and, under 
appropriate conditions, differentiate into specialized cells of 
one or more types. Stem cells have great potential for regener-
ating damaged tissues.
The cloning of plants and animals was first attempted 
over 50 years ago in experiments designed to answer basic 
questions about the genetic potential of single cells. For 
example, researchers wondered if all the cells of an organ-
ism have the same genes or whether cells lose genes during 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   462 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 464 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 463
be restricted more and more as embryonic development 
and cell differentiation progress. These were foundational 
experiments that ultimately led to stem cell technology,  
and Gurdon received the 2012 Nobel Prize in Medicine  
for this work.
Reproductive Cloning of Mammals
In addition to cloning frogs, researchers were able to clone 
mammals using early embryonic cells as a source of donor 
nuclei. Until about 25 years ago, though, it was not known 
whether a nucleus from a fully differentiated cell could be 
reprogrammed successfully to act as a donor nucleus. In 
1997, researchers in Scotland announced the birth of Dolly, 
a lamb cloned from an adult sheep by nuclear transfer from!a 
differentiated mammary gland cell (Figure 19.17). Using 
a technique related to that in Figure 19.16, the researchers 
implanted early embryos into surrogate mothers. Out of sev-
eral hundred embryos, one successfully completed normal 
development, and Dolly was born, a genetic clone of the 
nucleus donor. By the age of 6, Dolly had developed prema-
ture arthritis, and complications from a lung infection led to 
her euthanization. This led to speculation that this sheep’s 
cells were in some way not quite as healthy as those of a nor-
mal sheep, possibly reflecting incomplete reprogramming of 
the original transplanted nucleus. Reprogramming involves 
epigenetic changes that lead to changes in chromatin struc-
ture (see Concept 18.2), to be discussed shortly.
c Figure 19.17  
Reproductive cloning  
of a mammal by nuclear 
transfer. Dolly, shown 
here as a lamb, has a very 
different appearance from 
her surrogate mother, 
standing beside her.
Experiment John Gurdon and colleagues at Oxford 
University, in England, destroyed the nuclei of frog  
(Xenopus laevis) eggs by exposing the eggs to ultraviolet 
light. They then transplanted nuclei from cells of frog 
embryos and tadpoles into the enucleated eggs.
Frog egg cell Frog tadpole
Enucleated
egg cell
Most develop
into tadpoles.
Most stop developing
before tadpole stage.
Egg with donor nucleus
activated to begin
development
Frog embryo
UV
Less differ-
entiated cell
Fully differ-
entiated
(intestinal) cell
Donor
nucleus
trans-
planted
Donor
nucleus
trans-
planted
Results When the transplanted nuclei came from an early 
embryo, the cells of which are relatively undifferentiated, 
most of the recipient eggs developed into tadpoles. But 
when the nuclei came from the fully differentiated intestinal 
cells of a tadpole, fewer than 2% of the eggs developed into 
normal tadpoles, and most of the embryos stopped develop-
ing at a much earlier stage.
Conclusion The nucleus from a differentiated frog cell can 
direct development of a tadpole. However, its ability to do 
so decreases as the donor cell becomes more differentiated, 
presumably because of changes in the nucleus.
Data from J. B. Gurdon et al., The developmental capacity of nuclei trans-
planted from keratinized cells of adult frogs, Journal of Embryology and 
Experimental Morphology 34:93–112 (1975).
WHAT IF? If each cell in a four-cell embryo was already so 
specialized that it was not totipotent, what results would you predict 
for the experiment on the left side of the figure?
Can the nucleus from a differentiated animal 
cell direct development of an organism?
/uni25BC Figure 19.16 Inquiry
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Somatic Cell  
Nuclear Transfer 
to the age of the donor: The older the donor nucleus, the 
lower the percentage of normal tadpoles.
From these results, Gurdon concluded that something 
in the nucleus does change as animal cells differentiate. In 
frogs and most other animals, nuclear potential tends to 
Since that time, researchers have cloned many other 
mammals, including mice, cats, cows, horses, pigs, and 
dogs. In 2018, Chinese biologists reported the first cloning 
of a primate, the long-tailed macaque. In most cases, the 
research goal has been the production of new individuals, 
known as reproductive cloning. We have learned from such 
experiments that cloned animals of the same species are not 
always identical. For example, in 2016, scientists examined 
four 7- to 9-year-old clones genetically identical to Dolly and 
concluded that, unlike Dolly, they were healthy and aging 
normally. Another example of nonidentity in clones is the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   463 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 465 ===

464 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
more accurate and complete chromatin restructuring than 
occurs during cloning procedures. Because DNA methylation 
helps regulate gene expression, misplaced or extra methyl 
groups in the DNA of donor nuclei may interfere with the 
pattern of gene expression necessary for normal embryonic 
development. In fact, the success of a cloning attempt may 
depend in large part on whether or not the chromatin in the 
donor nucleus can be artificially modified to resemble that of 
a newly fertilized egg.
Stem Cells of Animals
Progress in cloning mammalian embryos, including primates, 
has heightened speculation about the cloning of humans, 
which has not yet been achieved past very early embryonic 
stages. The main reason researchers have been trying to clone 
human embryos is not for reproduction, but for the produc-
tion of stem cells to treat human diseases. Recall that a stem 
cell is a relatively unspecialized cell that can both reproduce 
itself indefinitely and, under appropriate conditions, differen-
tiate into specialized cells of one or more types (Figure 19.19).
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: Somatic Cell  
Nuclear Transfer 
Embryonic and Adult Stem Cells
Many early animal embryos contain stem cells capable of 
giving rise to differentiated cells of any type. Stem cells can be 
isolated from early embryos at a stage called the blastula stage 
or its human equivalent, the blastocyst stage. In culture, these 
first cloned cat, named CC for Carbon Copy (Figure 19.18). 
The color and pattern of her calico coat differed from that of 
her single female parent because of random X chromosome 
inactivation, which is a normal occurrence during embry-
onic development (see Figure 15.8). And identical human 
twins, which are naturally occurring “clones,” are always 
slightly different. Clearly, environmental influences and ran-
dom phenomena play a significant role during development.
Epigenetic Differences in Cloned Animals
In most nuclear transplantation studies thus far, only a small 
percentage of cloned embryos develop normally to birth. 
And like Dolly, many cloned animals exhibit defects. Cloned 
mice, for instance, are prone to obesity, pneumonia, liver fail-
ure, and premature death. Scientists assert that even cloned 
animals that appear normal are likely to have subtle defects.
Researchers have uncovered some reasons for the low 
efficiency of cloning and the high incidence of abnormali-
ties. In the nuclei of fully differentiated cells, a small subset 
of genes is turned on and expression of the rest of the genes 
is repressed. This regulation often is the result of epigenetic 
changes in chromatin, such as acetylation of histones or 
methylation of DNA (see Figure 18.7). During the nuclear 
transfer procedure, many of these changes must be reversed 
in the later-stage nucleus from a donor animal for genes to 
be expressed or repressed appropriately in earlier stages of 
development. Researchers have found that the DNA in cells 
from cloned embryos, like that of differentiated cells, often 
has abnormally high numbers of methyl groups. This finding 
suggests that the reprogramming of donor nuclei requires 
. Figure 19.18 CC (“Carbon Copy”), the first cloned cat 
(right), and her single parent. Rainbow (left) donated the 
nucleus in a cloning procedure that resulted in CC. However, the 
two cats are not identical: Rainbow is a classic calico cat with orange 
patches on her fur and has a “reserved personality,” while CC has a 
gray and white coat and is more playful.
Stem cell
Cell division
Stem cell Progenitor celland
or orFat cells Bone cells White blood cells
1A stem cell can divide into another 
stem cell and a progenitor cell (or into 
two stem cells or two progenitor cells).
2A progenitor cell can 
differentiate into one 
of several cell types, 
depending on external 
factors. This example is 
from a stem cell 
derived from bone 
marrow.
. Figure 19.19 How stem cells maintain their own population 
and generate differentiated cells.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Cultured Human  
Embryonic Stem Cells 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   464 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 466 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 465
numbers of stem cells, scientists are learning to identify and 
isolate these cells from various tissues and, in some cases, to 
grow them in culture. With the right culture conditions (for 
instance, the addition of specific growth factors), cultured 
stem cells from adult animals have been made to differentiate 
into various defined types of specialized cells, although none 
are as versatile as ES cells.
Research with embryonic or adult stem cells is a source 
of valuable data about differentiation and has enormous 
potential for medical applications. The ultimate aim is to 
supply cells for the repair of damaged or diseased organs: 
for example, insulin-producing pancreatic cells for people 
with type 1 diabetes or certain kinds of brain cells for 
people!with Parkinson’s disease or Huntington’s disease. 
Adult stem cells from bone marrow have long been used 
in bone marrow transplants as a source of immune system 
cells in patients whose own immune systems are nonfunc-
tional because of genetic disorders or radiation treatments 
for cancer.
The developmental potential of adult stem cells is lim-
ited to certain tissues. ES cells hold more promise than adult 
stem cells for most medical applications because ES cells are 
pluripotent, capable of differentiating into many differ-
ent cell types. One source of ES cells, first reported in 2013, is 
cloned human blastocysts produced by transferring a nucleus 
from a differentiated cell into an enucleated egg (similar 
to cloning Dolly the sheep). Prior to that report, cells were 
obtained only from embryos donated by patients undergoing 
infertility treatments or from long-term cell cultures originally 
established with cells isolated from donated embryos, an issue 
that prompts ethical and political discussions. Although the 
techniques for cloning early human embryos are still being 
optimized and the ethics discussed by researchers, they repre-
sent a potential new source for ES cells that may be less con-
troversial. Furthermore, with a donor nucleus from a person 
with a particular disease, researchers should be able to pro-
duce ES cells that match the patient and are thus not rejected 
by his or her immune system when used for treatment. When 
the main aim of cloning is to produce ES cells to treat disease, 
the process is called therapeutic cloning. Although most people 
believe that reproductive cloning of humans is unethical, 
opinions vary about the morality of therapeutic cloning.
Induced Pluripotent Stem (iPS) Cells
In another approach to make stem cells for research and ther-
apy, researchers succeeded in 2007 in learning how to turn 
back the clock in fully differentiated cells, reprogramming 
them to act like ES cells. Differentiated cells can be trans-
formed into a type of ES cell by using a modified retrovirus 
to introduce extra, cloned copies of four “stem cell” master 
regulatory genes. The “deprogrammed” cells are known 
as induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells because, in using this 
fairly simple laboratory technique to return them to their 
embryonic stem (ES) cells reproduce indefinitely, and depend-
ing on culture conditions, they can be made to differentiate 
into a wide variety of specialized cells (Figure 19.20), includ-
ing even eggs and sperm.
The adult body also has stem cells, which serve to replace 
nonreproducing specialized cells as needed. In contrast to 
ES cells, adult stem cells are not able to give rise to all cell 
types in the organism, though they can generate several 
defined types. For example, one of the several types of stem 
cells in bone marrow can generate all the different kinds 
of blood cells (see Figure 19.20), and another type of bone 
marrow stem cell can differentiate into bone, cartilage, fat, 
muscle, and the linings of blood vessels. To the surprise of 
many, the adult brain has been found to contain stem cells 
that continue to produce certain kinds of nerve cells there. 
Researchers have also reported finding stem cells in skin, hair, 
eyes, and dental pulp. Although adult animals have only tiny 
Early human
embryo
(blastocyst)
Embryonic stem cells
From bone
marrow in
this example
Adult stem cells
Cultured
stem cells
Cells that can
generate all
embryonic cell
types
Cells that generate
a limited number
of cell types
Different
culture
conditions
Different
types of
differentiated
cells
Liver cells Nerve cells Blood cells
. Figure 19.20 Working with stem cells. Animal stem cells, 
which can be isolated from early embryos or adult tissues and 
grown in culture, are self-perpetuating, relatively undifferentiated 
cells. Embryonic stem cells are easier to grow than adult stem cells 
and can theoretically give rise to all types of cells in an organism. 
The range of cell types that can arise from adult stem cells is not yet 
fully understood.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation:  
Creating Embryonic Stem Cell Lines 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   465 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 467 ===

466 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
received the 2012 Nobel Prize in Medicine for this work, 
shared with John Gurdon, whose work you read about  
in Figure 19.16.
By many criteria, iPS cells can perform most of the func-
tions of ES cells, but there are some differences in gene expres-
sion and other cellular functions, such as cell division. At 
least until these differences are fully understood, the study of 
ES cells will continue to make important contributions to the 
development of stem cell therapies. (In fact, it is likely that 
ES cells will always be a focus of basic research as well.) In the 
meantime, work is proceeding using the iPS cells that have 
been experimentally produced.
There are two major potential uses for human iPS cells. 
First, cells from patients with diseases have been repro-
grammed to become iPS cells, which act as model cells for 
studying the disease and potential treatments. Human iPS 
cell lines have already been developed from individuals with 
type 1 diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, 
Down syndrome, and many other diseases. Second, in the 
field of regenerative medicine, a patient’s own cells could be 
reprogrammed into iPS cells and then used to replace non-
functional tissues, such as cells of the retina of the eye that 
have been damaged by a condition called age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD). In fact, in 2014, Japanese researchers 
made iPS cells out of an AMD patient’s skin cells, caused them 
to differentiate into retinal cells, and implanted them into her 
retina. Although her vision was not markedly improved, fur-
ther deterioration was halted. Unfortunately, the cost of repro-
gramming cells into iPS cells is so high that it can’t be used as 
a standard treatment. Over time, the procedure may become 
less expensive, and some researchers have suggested creating 
a bank for storage of donor iPS cells that could be matched to 
patients’ tissues. Development of techniques that direct iPS 
cells to become specific cell types for regenerative medicine 
is an area of intense research. If the challenges are met, iPS 
cells created in this way could eventually provide tailor-made 
“replacement” cells for patients without using any human 
eggs or embryos, thus circumventing most ethical objections.
Stem cell
Progenitor cell
Oct3/4 Sox2
Klf4
c-Myc
Induced pluripotent 
stem (iPS) cell
Four “stem cell” master 
regulatory genes were 
introduced, using a 
retroviral cloning vector.
Skin 
Ƃbroblast 
cell
Can a fully differentiated human cell be 
“deprogrammed” to become a stem cell?
/uni25BC Figure 19.21 Inquiry
Experiment Shinya 
Yamanaka and colleagues  
at Kyoto University, in Japan, 
used a retroviral vector to 
introduce four genes into fully 
differentiated human skin 
fibroblast cells. The cells were 
then cultured in a medium  
that would support  
growth of stem cells.
Results Two weeks later, the cells resembled embryonic 
stem cells in appearance and were actively dividing. Their 
gene expression patterns, gene methylation patterns, and 
other characteristics were also consistent with those of em-
bryonic stem cells. The iPS cells were able to differentiate 
into heart muscle cells, as well as other cell types.
Conclusion The four genes induced differentiated skin 
cells to become pluripotent stem cells, with characteristics of 
embryonic stem cells.
Data from K. Takahashi et al., Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult 
human fibroblasts by defined factors, Cell 131:861–872 (2007).
WHAT IF? Patients with diseases such as heart disease or 
Alzheimer’s could have their own skin cells reprogrammed to become 
iPS cells. Once affordable procedures have been developed for this 
and for converting iPS cells into heart or nervous system cells, the 
patients’ own iPS cells might be used to treat their disease. When 
organs are transplanted from a donor to a recipient, the recipient’s 
immune system may reject the transplant, a dangerous condition. 
Would using iPS cells be expected to carry the same risk? Why or why 
not? Given that these cells are actively dividing, undifferentiated cells, 
what risks might this procedure carry?
CONCEPT CHECK 19.3
1. Based on current knowledge, how would you explain the 
difference in the percentage of tadpoles that developed 
from the two kinds of donor nuclei in Figure 19.16?
2. A few companies in China and South Korea provide the 
service of cloning dogs, using cells from their clients’ pets 
to provide nuclei in procedures like that in Figure 19.17. 
Should their clients expect the clone to look identical to 
their original pet? Why or why not? What ethical questions 
does this bring up?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Based on what you know about 
muscle differentiation (see Figure 18.18) and genetic engi-
neering, propose the first experiment you might try if you 
wanted to direct an embryonic stem cell or iPS cell to develop 
into a muscle cell.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
undifferentiated state, pluripotency has been restored. The 
experiments that first transformed human differentiated cells 
into iPS cells are described in Figure 19.21. Shinya Yamanaka  
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   466 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 468 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 467
Personal Genome Analysis
As you learned earlier, genome-wide association studies have 
pinpointed SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) that 
are linked to disease-associated alleles (see Figure 19.15). 
Individuals can be tested by PCR and sequencing for a SNP 
that is correlated with the abnormal allele. The presence of 
particular SNPs is correlated with increased risk for particular 
adverse health conditions such as heart disease, Alzheimer’s 
disease, and some types of cancer.
Direct-to-consumer genome analysis companies offer kits 
allowing individuals to send in a swab containing cheek cells 
that the company will analyze genetically. Genetic testing for 
risk factors like heart disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and some 
types of cancer is carried out by looking for linked SNPs that 
have been previously identified (see Figure 19.15). It may be 
helpful for individuals to learn about their health risks, with 
the understanding that such genetic tests merely reflect cor-
relations and do not make!predictions.
In addition to health-related genetic information, these 
companies compare a person’s DNA segments with those 
from reference populations around the world, established 
from thousands of individuals of known ancestry. Based on 
how closely the segments match up, the report can tell an 
individual about their likely ancestral breakdown. Females 
can also learn about their maternal lines of descent, based 
on comparisons of mitochondrial DNA, which is contrib-
uted to the egg only by the mother. For males, an analysis of 
the sequence of the Y chromosome can trace their paternal 
lines of descent. As the size of the database used by these 
companies increases, the results become more refined and 
more accurate.
Personalized Medicine
The techniques described in this chapter have also prompted 
improvements in disease treatments—for example, by 
knowing which specific cancer-related genes have been 
mutated in a particular patient’s tumor. By analyzing the 
expression of many genes in large numbers of breast can-
cer patients, researchers can refine their understanding of 
the different subtypes of breast cancer (see Figure 18.27). 
Knowing the expression levels of particular genes in a given 
individual can help physicians determine the likelihood 
that the cancer will recur, thus helping them design an 
appropriate treatment. Given that some low-risk patients 
have a 96% survival rate over a ten-year period with no treat-
ment, gene expression analysis allows doctors and patients 
access to valuable information when they are considering 
treatment options.
Many researchers envision a future of personalized 
medicine, a type of medical care in which each person’s 
specific genetic profile can provide information about dis-
eases or conditions for which the person is especially at risk 
The practical applications of 
DNA-based biotechnology affect 
our lives in many ways
In the last section, we’ll survey the practical applications of 
DNA-based biotechnology, the manipulation of organisms 
or their components to make useful products. Today, major 
applications of DNA technology and genetic engineering 
include medicine, forensic evidence and genetic profiles, 
environmental cleanup, and agriculture.
Medical Applications
One important use of DNA technology is the identifica-
tion of human genes whose mutation plays a role in genetic 
diseases. These discoveries may lead to ways of diagnosing, 
treating, and even preventing such conditions. DNA tech-
nology has also identified genes that play a role in a number 
of “nongenetic” diseases, from arthritis to AIDS, by influ-
encing susceptibility to these diseases. Furthermore, a wide 
variety of diseases involve changes in gene expression within 
the affected cells and often within the patient’s immune 
system. By using RNA-seq and DNA microarray assays (see 
Figures 19.12 and 19.13) or other techniques to compare 
gene expression in healthy and diseased tissues, researchers 
are finding genes that are turned on or off in particular dis-
eases. These genes and their products are potential targets for 
prevention or therapy.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Diseases
A new chapter in the diagnosis of infectious diseases has been 
opened by DNA technology, in particular the use of PCR and 
labeled nucleic acid probes to track down pathogens. For 
example, because the sequence of the RNA genome of HIV is 
known, RT-PCR can be used to amplify and therefore detect 
and quantify even a small amount of HIV RNA in blood or 
tissue samples (see Figure 19.11). RT-PCR is often the best way 
to detect an otherwise elusive infectious agent.
Medical scientists can now diagnose hundreds of human 
genetic disorders by using PCR with primers that target the 
genes associated with these disorders. The amplified DNA 
product is then sequenced to reveal the presence or absence 
of the disease-causing mutation. Among the genes for human 
diseases targeted in this way are those for sickle-cell disease, 
hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, Huntington’s disease, and 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Individuals with such dis-
eases can often be identified before the onset of symptoms, 
even before birth (see Figure 14.19). PCR can also be used to 
identify symptomless carriers of potentially harmful reces-
sive alleles as part of genetic counseling (see Concept 14.4).
CONCEPT 19.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   467 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 469 ===

468 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
and help make health-care decisions. As we will see later in 
the chapter, a genetic profile is currently taken to mean a set 
of genetic markers such as SNPs. Ultimately, however, it will 
likely mean the complete DNA sequence of an individual—
after sequencing becomes inexpensive enough. In fact, a 
2016 study suggested that for difficult-to-diagnose patients 
it might be faster and more economical to sequence just 
the expressed regions (the exons, together called the exome) 
or even all of the genome right away, rather than running 
through a standard series of diagnostic tests. The ability 
to sequence a person’s genome quickly and inexpensively 
is advancing rapidly, perhaps faster than development of 
appropriate treatments for the conditions. Still, the identifi-
cation of genes involved in these conditions provides targets 
for therapeutic interventions.
An individual’s genomic information can be used to 
predict the benefits and risks of particular medications, an 
approach called pharmacogenetics. There are over 300 medica-
tions for which the Food and Drug Administration recom-
mends genetic testing for patients prior to their use.
Human Gene Therapy and Gene Editing
Gene therapy—the introduction of genes into an afflicted 
individual for therapeutic purposes—holds great potential for 
treating the relatively small number of disorders traceable to 
a single defective gene. The aim of this approach is to insert 
a normal allele of the defective gene into the somatic cells of 
the tissue affected by the disorder.
For gene therapy of somatic cells to be permanent, the 
cells that receive the normal allele must be cells that mul-
tiply throughout the patient’s life. Bone marrow cells, 
which include the stem cells that give rise to all the cells 
of the blood and immune system, are prime candidates. 
Figure!19.22 outlines one procedure for gene therapy in an 
individual whose bone marrow cells do not produce a vital 
enzyme because of a single defective gene. One type of severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is caused by this kind of 
defect. If the treatment is successful, the patient’s bone mar-
row cells will begin producing the missing protein, and the 
patient may be cured.
The procedure shown in Figure 19.22 was used in gene 
therapy trials for SCID in France in 2000, resulting in the 
first indisputable success of gene therapy. However, three 
patients subsequently developed leukemia, a type of blood 
cell cancer, and one of them died. Researchers have con-
cluded it is likely that the insertion of the retroviral vec-
tor occurred near a gene that triggers the proliferation of 
blood cells. Using a viral vector that does not come from 
a retrovirus, clinical researchers have treated several other 
genetic diseases somewhat successfully with gene therapy, 
including a type of progressive blindness (see Concept 50.3), 
Cloned gene 
(normal 
allele, 
absent 
from 
patient’s 
cells)
Viral RNA
Bone
marrow
cell from
patient
Viral
capsid
Bone
marrow
Insert RNA version of normal allele 
into retrovirus or other viral vector.
1
Let virus infect bone marrow cells
that have been removed from the
patient and cultured.
2
Viral DNA carrying the normal
allele inserts into chromosome.
3
Inject engineered
cells into patient.
4
. Figure 19.22 Gene therapy using a retroviral vector. 
A!retrovirus that has been rendered harmless is used as a vector 
in this procedure, which exploits the ability of a retrovirus to 
insert a DNA transcript of its RNA genome into the chromosomal 
DNA of its host cell (see Figure 26.9). If the foreign gene carried 
by the retroviral vector is expressed, the cell and its descendants 
will possess the gene product. Cells that reproduce throughout 
life, such!as bone marrow cells, are ideal candidates for 
gene!therapy.
a degenerative disease of the nervous system, and a blood 
disorder involving the b-globin gene.
Gene therapy raises many technical issues. For example, 
how can the activity of the transferred gene be controlled so 
that cells make appropriate amounts of the gene product at 
the right time and in the right place? How can we be sure that 
the insertion of the therapeutic gene does not harm some 
other necessary cell function? As more is learned about DNA 
control elements and gene interactions, researchers may be 
able to answer such questions.
A more direct approach that avoids the complications 
of using a viral vector in gene therapy is made possible 
by gene editing, especially using the CRISPR-Cas9 system 
 Mastering  Biology HHMI Video: Gene Therapy  
HHMI Video: The Search for a Mutated Gene  
HHMI Video: Genes as Medicine
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   468 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 470 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 469
previously. Beyond those technical concerns, however, 
are underlying ethical considerations: Under what circum-
stances, if any, should genomes of human germ lines be 
altered? Would alterations lead to the practice of eugenics, 
a deliberate effort to control the genetic makeup of human 
populations? It is imperative to consider these questions.
Pharmaceutical Products
The pharmaceutical industry derives significant benefit from 
advances in DNA technology and genetic research, applying 
them to the development of useful drugs to treat diseases. 
Pharmaceutical products are synthesized using methods of 
either organic chemistry or biotechnology, depending on the 
nature of the product.
Synthesis of Small Molecules for Use as Drugs  
Determining the sequence and structure of proteins crucial 
for tumor cell survival has led to the identification of small 
molecules that combat certain cancers by blocking the 
function of these proteins. One drug, imatinib (trade name 
Gleevec), is a small molecule that inhibits one tyrosine kinase 
(see Figure 9.8). The overexpression of this kinase, resulting 
from a chromosomal translocation, is instrumental in caus-
ing chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML; see Figure 15.16). 
Patients in the early stages of CML who are treated with ima-
tinib have exhibited nearly complete, sustained remission 
from the cancer. Drugs that work in a similar way have also 
been used with success to treat a few types of lung and breast 
cancers. This approach is feasible only for cancers whose mo-
lecular basis is fairly well understood.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Gleevec 
In many cases of such drug-treated tumors, though, cells 
later arise that are resistant to the new drug. In one study, the 
whole genome of the tumor cells was sequenced both before 
and after the appearance of drug resistance. Comparison 
of the sequences showed genetic changes that allowed the 
tumor cells to “get around” the drug-inhibited protein. Here, 
we can see that cancer cells demonstrate the principles of 
evolution: Certain tumor cells have a random mutation that 
allows them to survive in the presence of a particular drug, 
and as a consequence of natural selection in!the presence of 
the drug, these are the cells that survive and reproduce.
Protein Production in Cell Cultures Pharmaceutical prod-
ucts that are proteins are commonly synthesized on a large 
scale using cell cultures. You learned earlier in the chapter 
about DNA cloning and gene expression systems for produc-
ing large quantities of a chosen protein that is present natu-
rally in only minute amounts. The host cells used in such ex-
pression systems can even be engineered to secrete a protein 
as it is made, thereby simplifying the task of purifying it by 
traditional biochemical methods.
(see!Figure!17.28). In this approach, the existing defective 
gene is edited to correct the mutation.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Jennifer Doudna:  
CRISPR Provides a Tool for Changing Genes 
In 2018, researchers reported promising results using the 
CRISPR-Cas9 system in an attempt to correct the genetic 
defect that causes sickle-cell disease. They edited cells from 
patients with sickle-cell disease and injected them into bone 
marrow in mice. After 19 weeks, the gene remained corrected 
in 20–40% of the injected cells. Researchers, physicians, 
and patients alike are excited about the potential of CRISPR 
technology to treat or even cure human diseases that have a 
genetic basis, such as sickle-cell, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s 
diseases, as well as some types of cancer. However, there are 
still concerns about using CRISPR-treated cells in humans 
because of possible effects on genes that are not being tar-
geted; this is an active area of research.
In addition to technical challenges, gene therapy and 
gene editing provoke ethical questions. Some critics believe 
that tampering with human genes in any way is unethical. 
Other observers see no fundamental difference between 
transplanting genes into somatic cells and transplanting 
organs from one person to another.
An even more pressing question is the issue of engineering 
human germ-line cells to try to correct a defect in future gen-
erations. Such genetic engineering is now routinely done in 
laboratory mice, and some methods for genetic engineering 
of human embryos have been developed.
The development of the CRISPR-Cas9 system has engen-
dered much debate about the ethics of gene editing. Jennifer 
Doudna (Figure 19.14), a co-discoverer of CRISPR-Cas9, and 
other biologists have agreed to exercise extreme caution as 
the field moves forward. Together, they called for the research 
community to “strongly discourage” any experimental work 
on human eggs or embryos.
In spite of this general consensus among biologists, a 
Chinese researcher reported in 2018 that he had used the 
CRISPR-Cas9 system to edit genes in embryos that com-
pleted fetal development and were born as twins and a third 
individual. He claimed to have edited the CCR5 gene, which 
codes for a co-receptor for HIV (see Figure 8.8), so that HIV 
would be unable to bind and infect the cells. The twins’ 
father was HIV-positive, which was the rationale the scien-
tist used for carrying out this genetic engineering. However, 
this act was roundly condemned as highly unethical by the 
biological community; the researcher lost his job and may 
face a criminal investigation. In 2019, an advisory panel to 
the World Health Organization proposed establishing a reg-
istry to monitor any gene-editing research in humans.
There are many potential technical problems with the 
CRISPR-Cas9 technique, like the off-target effects mentioned 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   469 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 471 ===

470 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
proteins must be tested to ensure that they (or contaminants 
from the farm animals) will not cause allergic reactions or 
other adverse effects in patients who receive them.
Forensic Evidence and Genetic Profiles
In violent crimes, body fluids or small pieces of tissue may be 
left at the scene or on the clothes or other possessions of the 
victim or assailant. If enough blood, semen, or tissue is avail-
able, forensic laboratories can determine the blood type or 
tissue type by using antibodies to detect specific cell-surface 
proteins. However, such tests require fairly fresh samples in 
relatively large amounts. Also, because many people have the 
same blood or tissue type, this approach can only exclude a 
suspect; it cannot provide strong evidence of guilt.
DNA testing, on the other hand, can identify the guilty 
individual with a high degree of certainty because the DNA 
sequence of every person is unique (except for identical 
twins). Genetic markers that vary in the population can be 
analyzed for a given person to determine that individual’s 
unique set of genetic markers, or genetic profile. (This 
term is preferred over “DNA fingerprint” by forensic scien-
tists, who want to emphasize the heritable aspect of these 
markers rather than the fact that they produce a pattern on 
a gel that, like a fingerprint, is visually recognizable.) The 
FBI started applying DNA technology to forensics in 1988, 
using a method involving gel electrophoresis and nucleic 
acid hybridization to detect similarities and differences in 
DNA samples. This method required much smaller samples of 
blood or tissue than earlier methods—only about 1,000 cells.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Genetic Profiles
Today, forensic scientists use an even more sensitive 
method that takes advantage of variations in length of 
genetic markers called short tandem repeats (STRs). 
These are tandemly repeated units of two- to five-nucleotide 
sequences in specific regions of the genome. The number of 
repeats present in these regions is highly variable from person 
to person (polymorphic); even for a single individual, the two 
alleles of an STR may differ from each other. For example, 
one individual may have the sequence ACAT repeated 30 
times at one genome locus and 15 times at the same locus on 
the other homolog, whereas another individual may have 
18 repeats at this locus on each homolog. (These two geno-
types can be expressed by the two repeat numbers: 30,15 and 
18,18.) PCR is used to amplify particular STRs, using sets of 
primers that are labeled with colored fluorescent tags; the 
length of the region, and thus the number of repeats, can 
then be determined by electrophoresis. The PCR step allows 
use of this method even when the DNA is in poor condition 
or available only in minute quantities: A tissue sample con-
taining as few as 20 cells can be sufficient.
Among the first pharmaceutical products manufactured in 
this way were human insulin and human growth hormone 
(HGH). Some 2 million people with diabetes in the United 
States depend on insulin treatment to control their disease. 
Human growth hormone has been a boon to children born 
with a form of dwarfism caused by inadequate amounts of 
HGH, as well as helping patients with AIDS gain weight. 
Another important pharmaceutical product produced by 
genetic engineering is tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). If 
administered shortly after a heart attack, TPA helps dissolve 
blood clots and reduces the risk of subsequent heart attacks.
Protein Production by “Pharm” Animals In some cases, 
instead of using cell systems to produce large quantities of 
protein products, pharmaceutical scientists can use whole 
organisms. To do this, they use a transgene, a gene that has 
been transferred into one organism from another. They first 
remove eggs from a female of the recipient species and fertil-
ize them in vitro. Meanwhile, they clone the desired gene from 
a donor organism. They then inject the cloned DNA directly 
into the nuclei of the fertilized eggs. Some of the cells integrate 
the foreign DNA, the transgene, into their genome and are 
able to express the foreign gene. The engineered embryos that 
arise from these zygotes are then surgically implanted in a sur-
rogate female. If an embryo develops successfully, the result is 
a transgenic organism that expresses its new, “foreign” gene.
Assuming that the introduced gene encodes a protein 
desired in large quantities, transgenic animals can act as phar-
maceutical “factories.” For example, a transgene for a human 
blood protein such as antithrombin, which prevents blood 
clots, can be inserted into the genome of a goat in such a way 
that the transgene’s product is secreted in the animal’s milk 
(Figure 19.23). The protein is then purified from the milk 
(which is easier than purification from a cell culture). Such 
. Figure 19.23 Goats as “pharm” animals. This transgenic goat 
carries a gene for a human blood protein, antithrombin, which 
she secretes in her milk. Patients with a rare hereditary disorder 
in!which!this protein is lacking suffer from formation of blood 
clots in their blood vessels. Easily purified from the goat’s milk, 
the protein is used to prevent blood clots in these patients during 
surgery or childbirth.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   470 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 472 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 471
his close male relatives fathered at least one of the children 
of Sally Hemings, one of his slaves. Genetic profiles can also 
identify victims of mass casualties. The largest such effort 
occurred after the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001; 
more than 10,000 samples of victims’ remains were compared 
with DNA samples from personal items, such as toothbrushes, 
provided by families. Ultimately, forensic scientists succeeded 
in identifying almost 3,000 victims using these methods.
Just how reliable is a genetic profile? The greater the number 
of markers examined in a DNA sample, the more likely it is that 
the profile is unique to one individual. In forensic cases using 
STR analysis with 13 markers, the probability of two people 
having identical DNA profiles is somewhere between one in 10 
billion and one in several trillion. (For comparison, the world’s 
population is between 7 and 8 billion.) The exact probability 
depends on the frequency of those markers in the general pop-
ulation. Information on how common various markers are in 
different ethnic groups is critical because these marker frequen-
cies may vary considerably among ethnic groups and between 
a particular ethnic group and the population as a whole. With 
the increasing availability of frequency data, forensic scientists 
can make extremely accurate statistical calculations. Thus, 
despite problems that can arise from insufficient data, human 
error, or flawed evidence, genetic profiles are now accepted as 
compelling evidence by legal experts and scientists alike.
Environmental Cleanup
Increasingly, the diverse abilities of certain microorganisms 
to transform chemicals are being exploited for environmental 
cleanup. If the growth needs of such microorganisms make 
them unsuitable for direct use, scientists can now transfer 
the genes for their valuable metabolic capabilities into other 
microorganisms, which can then be used to treat environ-
mental problems. For example, many bacteria can extract 
heavy metals, such as copper, lead, and nickel, from their 
environments and incorporate the metals into compounds 
such as copper sulfate or lead sulfate, which are readily 
recoverable. Genetically engineered microorganisms may 
become important in both mining (especially as ore reserves 
are depleted) and cleaning up highly toxic mining wastes. 
Biotechnologists are also trying to engineer microorgan-
isms that can degrade chlorinated hydrocarbons and other 
harmful compounds. These microorganisms could be used in 
wastewater treatment plants or by manufacturers before the 
compounds are ever released into the environment.
Agricultural Applications
Scientists are working to learn more about the genomes of 
agriculturally important plants and animals. For a number of 
years, they have been using DNA technology in an effort to 
improve agricultural productivity. The selective breeding of 
In a murder case, for example, this method can be used to 
compare DNA samples from the suspect, the victim, and a 
small amount of blood found at the crime scene. The foren-
sic scientist tests only a few selected portions of the DNA—
usually 13 STR markers. However, even this small set of mark-
ers can provide a forensically useful genetic profile because 
the probability that two people (who are not identical twins) 
would have exactly the same set of STR markers is vanishingly 
small. The Innocence Project, a nonprofit organization dedi-
cated to overturning wrongful convictions, uses STR analysis 
of archived samples from crime scenes to revisit old cases. As 
of 2019, according to that group, 362 innocent people have 
been released from prison as a result of DNA-based forensic 
and legal work (Figure 19.24).
Genetic profiles can also be useful for other purposes. A 
comparison of the DNA of a mother, her child, and the pur-
ported father can conclusively settle a question of paternity. 
Sometimes paternity is of historical interest: Genetic profiles 
provided strong evidence that Thomas Jefferson or one of 
STR
marker 1
Source of
sample
Semen on victim
Earl Washington
Kenneth Tinsley
17,19
16,18
17,19
13,16
14,15
13,16
12,12
11,12
12,12
STR
marker 2
STR
marker 3
In STR analysis, selected STR markers in a DNA sample are ampliƂed
by PCR, and the PCR products are separated by electrophoresis.
The procedure reveals how many repeats are present for each STR
locus in the sample. An individual has two alleles per STR locus,
each with a certain number of repeats. This table shows the num-
ber of repeats for three STR markers in three samples: from semen
found on the victim, from Washington, and from another man
(Kenneth Tinsley), who was in prison because of an unrelated
conviction. These and other STR data (not shown) exonerated
Washington and led Tinsley to plead guilty to the murder. 
(b)
In 1984, Earl Washington was
convicted and sentenced to
death for the 1982 rape and
murder of Rebecca Williams.
His sentence was commuted
to life in prison in 1993 due
to new doubts about the
evidence. In 2000, STR analysis
by forensic scientists associ-
ated with the Innocence
Project showed conclusively
that he was innocent. This
photo shows Washington just
before his release in 2001,
after 17 years in prison.
(a)
. Figure 19.24 STR analysis used to release an innocent man 
from prison.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   471 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 473 ===

472 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
research study cancer cell genes were transferred into bacte-
ria or viruses? To guard against such rogue microorganisms, 
scientists developed a set of guidelines that were adopted as 
formal government regulations in the United States and some 
other countries. One safety measure is a set of strict laboratory 
procedures designed to prevent engineered microorganisms 
from either infecting researchers or accidentally leaving the 
laboratory. In addition, strains of microorganisms to be used 
in recombinant DNA experiments are genetically crippled 
to ensure that they cannot survive outside the laboratory. 
Finally, certain obviously dangerous experiments have 
been!banned.
Today, most public concern about possible hazards centers 
not on recombinant microorganisms but on genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs) used as food. A GMO is a 
transgenic organism that has acquired one or more genes 
from another species or from another variety of the same spe-
cies. Some salmon, for example, have been genetically modi-
fied by addition of a more active salmon growth hormone 
gene. However, the majority of the GMOs that contribute to 
our food supply are not animals, but crop plants.
GM crops are widespread in the United States, Argentina, 
and Brazil; together, these countries account for over 80% 
of the world’s acreage devoted to such crops. In the United 
States, most corn, soybean, and canola crops are genetically 
modified, and a recent law requires labeling of GM products. 
The same foods are an ongoing subject of controversy in 
Europe, where the GM revolution has been met with strong 
opposition. Many Europeans are concerned about the safety 
of GM foods and the possible environmental consequences 
of growing GM plants. Although a small number of GM 
crops have been grown on European soil, the European 
Union established a comprehensive legal framework regard-
ing GMOs in 2015. Among other regulations, individual 
member!states may ban either the growing or importing of 
GM crops, which must be clearly labeled. The high degree of 
consumer distrust in Europe makes the future of GM crops 
there uncertain.
Advocates of a cautious approach toward GM crops fear 
that transgenic plants might pass their new genes to close 
relatives in nearby wild areas. We know that lawn and crop 
grasses, for example, commonly exchange genes with wild 
relatives via pollen transfer. If crop plants carrying genes for 
resistance to herbicides, diseases, or insect pests pollinated 
wild ones, the offspring might become “super weeds” that 
are very difficult to control. Another worry involves possible 
risks to human health from GM foods. Some people fear that 
the protein products of transgenes might lead to allergic reac-
tions. Although there is some evidence that this could hap-
pen, advocates claim that these proteins could be tested in 
advance to avoid producing ones that cause allergic reactions. 
(For further discussion of plant biotechnology and GM crops, 
see Concept 38.3.)
both livestock (animal husbandry) and crops has exploited 
naturally occurring mutations and genetic recombination for 
thousands of years.
As we described earlier, DNA technology enables scientists 
to produce transgenic animals, which speeds up the selective 
breeding process. The goals of creating a transgenic animal 
are often the same as the goals of traditional breeding—for 
instance, to make a sheep with better quality wool, a pig 
with leaner meat, or a cow that will mature in a shorter time. 
Scientists might, for example, identify and clone a gene that 
causes the development of larger muscles (muscles make up 
most of the meat we eat) in one breed of cattle and transfer 
it to other cattle or even to sheep. However, health problems 
are not uncommon among farm animals carrying genes from 
other species, and modification of the animal’s own genes 
using the CRISPR-Cas9 system will likely emerge as a more 
useful technique. Animal health and welfare are important 
issues to consider when genetically altering animals.
Agricultural scientists have already endowed a number 
of crop plants with genes for desirable traits, such as delayed 
ripening and resistance to spoilage, disease, and drought. 
Modifications can also add value to food crops, giving them 
a longer shelf life or improved flavor or nutritional value. For 
many plant species, a single tissue cell grown in culture can 
give rise to an adult plant. Thus, genetic manipulations can 
be performed on an ordinary somatic cell and the cell then 
can be used to generate a plant with new traits.
Genetic engineering is rapidly replacing traditional plant-
breeding programs, especially for useful traits, such as her-
bicide or pest resistance, determined by one or a few genes. 
Crops engineered with a bacterial gene making the plants 
resistant to an herbicide can grow while weeds are destroyed, 
and genetically engineered crops that can resist destructive 
insects reduce the need for chemical insecticides.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations has predicted that we will need 70% more food by 
the year 2050 than the planet is currently producing. One 
novel approach is being taken by researchers working on the 
international C4 Rice Project. The common form of rice, a 
global food staple, uses the C3 form of photosynthesis (see 
Concept 11.5). The aim of researchers engaged in this project 
is to genetically engineer a strain of rice that can use C4 pho-
tosynthesis, which is more efficient. In 2017, the first step 
was accomplished when they were able to genetically engi-
neer a corn gene into rice plants.
Safety and Ethical Questions Raised  
by DNA Technology
Early concerns about potential dangers associated with 
recombinant DNA technology and genetic engineering 
focused on the possibility that hazardous new pathogens 
might be created. What might happen, for instance, if in a 
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   472 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 474 ===

19 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
analyze DNA and to produce useful new products or organisms 
with beneficial traits.
• In genetic engineering, bacterial restriction enzymes  
are used to cut DNA molecules within short, specific nucleo-
tide sequences (restriction sites), yielding a set of double- 
stranded restriction fragments with single-stranded 
sticky!ends:
G
CTTAA
AATTC
G
Sticky end
5¿ 5¿ 3¿3¿
3¿ 3¿ 5¿5¿
• The sticky ends on restriction fragments from one DNA source 
can base-pair with complementary sticky ends on fragments from 
other DNA molecules. Sealing the base-paired fragments with 
DNA ligase produces recombinant DNA molecules.
• DNA restriction fragments of different lengths can be separated 
by gel electrophoresis.
• The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can amplify (produce 
many copies of) a specific target segment of DNA, using prim-
ers that bracket the desired sequence and a heat-resistant DNA 
polymerase.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 19.1
DNA sequencing and DNA cloning are valuable  
tools for genetic engineering and biological  
inquiry (pp. 450–457)
• Nucleic acid hybridization, the base pairing of one strand 
of a nucleic acid to the complementary sequence on a strand 
from another nucleic acid molecule, is widely used in DNA 
technology.
• DNA sequencing can be carried out using the dideoxy 
sequencing method in automated sequencing machines.
• Fast and inexpensive next-generation (high-throughput) tech-
niques for sequencing DNA are based on sequencing by synthesis: 
DNA polymerase is used to synthesize a stretch of DNA using a 
single-stranded template, and the order in which nucleotides 
are added reveals the sequence. Third-generation sequencing 
methods, including nanopore technology, sequence long DNA 
molecules one at a time.
• Gene cloning (or DNA cloning) produces multiple copies of 
a gene (or DNA segment) that can be used to manipulate and 
There is always a danger that too much regulation will 
stifle basic research and its potential benefits. On the other 
hand, genetic engineering—especially gene editing with the 
CRISPR-Cas9 system—enables us to profoundly and rapidly 
alter species that have been evolving for millennia. A good 
example is the potential use of a gene drive that would elimi-
nate the ability of mosquito species to carry diseases or even 
eradicate certain mosquito species. There would probably be 
health benefits to this approach, at least initially, but unfore-
seen problems could easily arise. Given the tremendous 
power of DNA technology, we must proceed with humility 
and caution.
Today, governments and regulatory agencies through-
out the world are grappling with how to facilitate the use 
of biotechnology in agriculture, industry, and medicine 
while ensuring that new products and procedures are safe. 
In the United States, such applications of biotechnology 
must be evaluated for potential risks by various regulatory 
agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, the National Institutes of 
Health, and the Department of Agriculture. Meanwhile, these 
same agencies and the public must consider the ethical impli-
cations of biotechnology.
Advances in biotechnology have allowed us to obtain 
complete genome sequences for humans and many other 
species, providing a vast treasure trove of information about 
genes. We can ask how certain genes differ from species to 
species, as well as how genes and, ultimately, entire genomes 
have evolved. (These are the subjects of Chapter 20.) At the 
same time, the increasing speed and falling cost of sequenc-
ing the genomes of individuals are raising significant ethical 
questions. Who should have the right to examine someone 
else’s genetic information? How should that information be 
used? Should a person’s genome be a factor in determining 
eligibility for a job or insurance? Ethical considerations, as 
well as concerns about potential environmental and health 
hazards, will likely slow some applications of biotechnology. 
CONCEPT CHECK 19.4
1. What is the advantage of using stem cells for gene therapy 
or gene editing?
2. List at least three different properties that have been 
acquired by crop plants via genetic engineering.
3. WHAT IF? As the investigator of a murder case, how can 
you use DNA technology to identify the guilty? Discuss the 
genetic basis of this technology.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 473
 Mastering Biology Interview with David 
Suzuki: Exploring ethical issues related to DNA 
technology
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   473 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 475 ===

474 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
potential for medical use. ES cells are pluripotent but difficult 
to acquire. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells resemble ES cells 
in their capacity to differentiate; they can be generated by repro-
gramming differentiated cells. iPS cells hold promise for medical 
research and regenerative medicine.
? Describe how, using mice, a researcher could carry out (1) organismal 
cloning, (2) production of ES cells, and (3) generation of iPS cells, 
focusing on how the cells are reprogrammed. (The procedures are 
basically the same in humans and mice.)
• To clone a eukaryotic gene:
DNA fragments obtained 
by PCR or from another source 
(cut by same restriction
enzyme used on cloning vector)
Mix and ligate
Recombinant DNA plasmids
Cloning
vector
(often a 
bacterial 
plasmid)
Recombinant plasmids are returned to host cells, each of which 
divides to form a clone of cells.
• Expressing cloned eukaryotic genes in bacterial host cells poses 
several technical difficulties. The use of cultured eukaryotic cells 
as host cells, coupled with appropriate expression vectors, 
helps avoid these problems.
? Describe how the process of gene cloning results in a cell clone 
containing a recombinant plasmid.
CONCEPT 19.2
Biologists use DNA technology to study gene 
expression and function (pp. 457–462)
• Several techniques use hybridization of a nucleic acid probe to 
detect the presence of specific mRNAs.
• In situ hybridization and RT-PCR can detect the presence of 
a given mRNA in a tissue or an RNA sample, respectively.
• Sets of genes co-expressed by a group of cells can be detected by 
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)—sequencing the cDNAs corre-
sponding to mRNAs from the cells. DNA microarrays are also 
used for this purpose.
• For a gene of unknown function, experimental inactivation of 
the gene (a gene knockout) and observation of the resulting phe-
notypic effects can provide clues to its function. The CRISPR-Cas9 
system allows researchers to edit genes in living cells in a specific, 
desired way. The new alleles can be altered so that they are inher-
ited in a biased way through a population (gene drive).
• In humans, genome-wide association studies identify and 
use single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as genetic 
markers for alleles that are associated with particular conditions.
? What useful information is obtained by detecting expression of 
specific genes?
CONCEPT 19.3
Cloned organisms and stem cells are useful for basic 
research and other applications (pp. 462–466)
• The question of whether all the cells in an organism have the 
same genome prompted the first attempts at organismal cloning.
• Single differentiated cells from plants are often totipotent: 
capable of generating all the tissues of a complete new plant.
• Transplantation of the nucleus from a differentiated animal cell 
into an enucleated egg can sometimes give rise to a new animal.
• Certain embryonic stem cells (ES cells) from animal embryos 
and particular adult stem cells from adult tissues can reproduce 
and differentiate both in the lab and in the organism, offering the 
CONCEPT 19.4
The practical applications of DNA-based 
biotechnology affect our lives in many ways  
(pp. 467–473)
• DNA technology, including the analysis of genetic markers such 
as SNPs, is increasingly being used in the diagnosis of genetic and 
other diseases and in personal genome analysis. Personalized med-
icine offers potential for an individual minimizing their known 
risk for a disease, as well as better treatment of genetic disorders 
or cancers. Gene therapy or gene editing with the CRISPR-Cas9 
system may also lead to permanent cures. DNA technology is used 
with cell cultures in the large-scale production of protein hor-
mones and other proteins with therapeutic uses. Some therapeutic 
proteins are being produced in transgenic “pharm” animals.
• Analysis of genetic markers such as short tandem repeats 
(STRs) in DNA isolated from tissue or body fluids found at crime 
scenes leads to a genetic profile. Use of genetic profiles can pro-
vide definitive evidence that a suspect is innocent or strong evi-
dence of guilt. Such analysis is also useful in parenthood disputes 
and in identifying the remains of crime victims.
• Genetically engineered microorganisms can be used to extract 
minerals from the environment or degrade various types of toxic 
waste materials.
• The aims of developing transgenic plants and animals are to im-
prove agricultural productivity and food quality.
• The potential benefits of genetic engineering must be care-
fully weighed against the potential for harm to humans or the 
environment.
? What factors affect whether a given genetic disease would be a good 
candidate for successful gene therapy?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. MAKE CONNECTIONS Imagine you want to study one of the 
human crystallins, proteins present in the lens of the eye (see 
Figure 1.8). T o obtain a sufficient amount of the protein of interest, 
you decide to clone the gene that codes for it. Assume you know 
the sequence of this gene. Explain how you would go about this.
9. MAKE CONNECTIONS Looking at Figure 19.15, what does 
it mean for a SNP to be “linked” to a disease-associated allele? 
How does this allow the SNP to be used as a genetic marker? 
(See Concept 15.3.)
10. DRAW IT Y ou are cloning an aardvark gene, using a bacterial 
plasmid as a vector. The green diagram shows the plasmid, 
which contains the restriction site for the enzyme used in 
Figure 19.5. Above the plasmid is a segment of linear aardvark 
DNA that was synthesized using PCR. Diagram your cloning 
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   474 14/03/20   5:32 AM

=== SIDE 476 ===

 CHAPTER 19  DNA Technology 475
13. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION In a short essay 
(100–150 words), discuss how the genetic basis of life plays a 
central role in biotechnology.
14. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
The water in the 
Y ellowstone National 
Park hot springs shown 
here is around 160°F 
(70°C). Biologists 
assumed that no species 
of organisms could 
live in water above 
about 130°F (55°C), so 
they were surprised 
to find several species 
of bacteria there, now 
called thermophiles 
(“heat-lovers”). Y ou’ve 
learned in this chapter how an enzyme from one species, 
Thermus aquaticus, made feasible one of the most important 
DNA-based techniques used in labs today. Identify the enzyme, 
and indicate the value of its being isolated from a thermophile. 
Suggest other reasons why enzymes from this bacterium (or 
other thermophiles) might also be valuable.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
procedure, and show what would happen to these two 
molecules during each step. Use one color for the aardvark 
DNA!and its bases and another color for those of the plasmid. 
Label each step and all 59 and 39 ends.
GAATTCTAAAGCGCTTATGAATTC5¿ 3¿
CTTAAGATTTCGCG
Aardvark DNA
Plasmid
AATACTTAAG3¿ 5¿
GAATTC
CTTAAG
11. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Ethical considerations aside, if 
DNA-based technologies became widely used, discuss how they 
might change the way evolution proceeds, as compared with 
the natural evolutionary mechanisms that have operated for 
the past 4 billion years.
12. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY In an experiment aimed at cloning 
pets, a group of scientists used nuclear transplantation. 
However, most of the progeny obtained from the experiment 
were excessively obese, carried many birth defects, and had 
premature deaths. After a thorough check on the protocols 
followed, the scientists found some lacunae. What could have 
gone wrong with the experiment?
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How can CRISPR-Cas9 be used to create a gene drive?
Go to “Can We Handle the Power of CRISPR?”  
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C19_PRF.indd   475 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 477 ===

Figure 20.1 The elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii) looks vaguely prehistoric and 
has been called a “living fossil.” In fact, it has the slowest evolving genome of any 
vertebrate sequenced so far. Comparing rates of genome change in different species 
provides insights into the evolutionary past.
The Evolution of Genomes20
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 20
• HHMI Animation: Shotgun Sequencing
• Animation: The Human Genome Project: 
The Genes on Human Chromosome 17
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Scientific Skills Exercise: 
Reading an Amino Acid Sequence 
Identity Table
• Tutorial: Using BLAST: What Can a Protein 
Sequence Reveal About Cancer?
20.1 The Human Genome Project fostered 
development of faster, less expensive 
sequencing techniques p. 477
20.2 Scientists use bioinformatics 
to analyze genomes and their 
functions p. 478
20.3 Genomes vary in size, number of 
genes, and gene density p. 482
20.4 Multicellular eukaryotes have a 
lot of noncoding DNA and many 
multigene families p. 484
20.5 Duplication, rearrangement, and 
mutation of DNA contribute to 
genome evolution p. 488
20.6 Comparing genome sequences 
provides clues to evolution and 
development p. 493
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Write genomic analysis questions: As you 
go through the chapter, make a table of 
genomic analyses that are discussed and write 
down some questions they can address. You 
can include questions not covered in the text. 
Genomic projects
and websites
Questions that
can be addressed
Human Genome
Project
ENCODE
project
How much DNA is in the
human genome?
How much of the human
genome codes for proteins?
What functions are carried
out by other regions
of the genome?
What are some questions that can be explored 
by sequencing and comparing genomes?
What are the functions
of the human genome?
How do genomes differ
in number of genes?
How do genomes evolve over time?What do gene sequences tell us about
evolutionary relationships
between species?
Genes for
proteins
and RNA
(1.5%)
Elephant shark:
slower-evolving
genome
Tiger tail sea horse:
faster-evolving
genome
Noncoding DNA
(98.5%)
 Escherichia coli
   4,400 genes
Homo sapiens
21,300 genes
Zea mays (corn)
  32,000 genes
Millions of years ago
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Chimpanzee
Human
Mouse
476
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   476 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 478 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 477
each time-consuming step, enabling the rate of sequencing to 
accelerate impressively: Whereas a productive lab could typi-
cally sequence 1,000 base pairs a day in the 1980s, by the year 
2000 each research center working on the Human Genome 
Project was sequencing 1,000 base pairs per second. Currently, 
the most widely used automated “next-generation” sequenc-
ing machines can sequence nearly 35 million base pairs per 
second (see Figure 19.3). Also, because of the sensitivity of 
these techniques, the DNA can be sequenced directly, either 
in fragments or as a single whole molecule; the cloning step 
(2 in Figure 20.2) is unnecessary. Methods that can analyze 
biological materials very rapidly and produce enormous vol-
umes of data are said to be “high-throughput.” Sequencing 
machines using rapid sequencing techniques are an example 
of high-throughput devices.
Along with massive increases in sequencing speed, the 
cost of sequencing entire genomes has plummeted. Whereas 
sequencing the first human genome took 13 years and cost 
between $500 million and $1 billion, by 2007 the same task 
took four months at a cost of $1 million. In 2019, the fastest 
machines are able to sequence the complete genomes of 48 
individuals in 44 hours for under $1,000 per genome.
CONCEPT 20.1
The Human Genome Project 
fostered development of faster, 
less expensive sequencing 
techniques
Upon sequencing the genome of any species, scientists can 
study whole sets of genes and their interactions, an approach 
called genomics. The sequencing efforts that feed this 
approach generate enormous volumes of data. The necessity 
of dealing with this ever-increasing flood of information has 
energized the field of bioinformatics, the application of 
computational methods to store and analyze biological data.
The sequencing of the human genome, an ambitious 
undertaking, officially began as the Human Genome 
Project in 1990. Organized by an international, publicly 
funded consortium of scientists at universities and research 
institutes, the project involved 20 large sequencing centers 
in six countries plus a host of other labs working on smaller 
parts of the project.
After the human genome sequence was largely completed 
in 2003, the sequence of each chromosome was analyzed 
and described in a series of papers, the last of which covered 
chromosome 1 and was published in 2006. The sequence is 
over 99% complete—the figure is not 100% because numer-
ous gaps remain, usually in regions with much repetitive 
DNA that are difficult to sequence. The sequenced DNA was 
pooled from a few individuals; scientists reviewed the results 
and agreed on a reference genome, a full sequence that 
best represents the genome of a species. The human reference 
genome is continuously being revised and re-released.
The ultimate goal in mapping any genome is to determine 
the complete nucleotide sequence of each chromosome. 
For the human genome, this was accomplished by scientists 
using sequencing machines and the dideoxy chain termina-
tion method mentioned in Concept 19.1. Two approaches 
complemented each other in this endeavor. The initial 
approach was a methodical one that ordered each fragment 
based on earlier genetic mapping of the human genome. In 
1998, however, molecular biologist J. Craig Venter set up 
a company (Celera Genomics) and declared his intention 
to sequence the entire human genome using an alterna-
tive strategy. The whole-genome shotgun approach 
starts with the cloning and sequencing of DNA fragments 
from randomly cut DNA. Powerful computer programs then 
assemble the resulting very large number of overlapping short 
sequences into a single continuous sequence (Figure 20.2). 
The whole-genome shotgun approach is widely used today.
A major thrust of the Human Genome Project was the 
development of technology for faster sequencing (see 
Concept 19.1). Improvements over the years chipped away at 
VISUAL SKILLS The fragments in step 2 of this figure are depicted 
as scattered, rather than arranged in an ordered array. How does this 
depiction reflect the approach?
Cut the DNA from
many copies of an
entire chromosome
into overlapping frag-
ments short enough
for sequencing.
1
Clone the fragments
in plasmid or other
vectors.
2
Sequence each
fragment.
3
Order the
sequences into one
overall sequence
with computer
software.
4
ACGATACTGGT
ACGATACTGGT
CGCCATCAGT
CGCCATCAGT
AGTCCGCTATACGA
AGTCCGCTATACGA
…CGCCATCAGTCCGCTATACGATACTGGT…
. Figure 20.2 Whole-genome shotgun approach to 
sequencing. In this approach, random DNA fragments are cloned 
(see Figure 19.4), sequenced, and then ordered relative to each other.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: Shotgun 
Sequencing 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   477 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 479 ===

478 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) and the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) maintain the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI), which today maintains 
a website (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), which has extensive 
bioinformatics resources. On this site are links to databases, 
software, and a wealth of information about genomics and 
related topics. Similar websites have also been established by 
three genome centers with which the NCBI collaborates: the 
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, the DNA Data Bank 
of Japan, and BGI (formerly known as the Beijing Genomics 
Institute) in Shenzhen, China. These large, comprehensive 
websites are complemented by others maintained by indi-
vidual or small groups of laboratories. Smaller websites often 
provide databases and software designed for a narrower pur-
pose, such as studying genetic and genomic changes in one 
particular type of cancer.
The NCBI database of sequences is called GenBank. As 
of August 2019, it included the sequences of 214 million 
fragments of genomic DNA, totaling 366 billion base pairs! 
GenBank is constantly updated, and the amount of data it 
contains increases rapidly. Any sequence in the database can 
be retrieved and analyzed using software from the NCBI web-
site or elsewhere.
One very widely used software program available on the 
NCBI website, called BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search 
Tool), allows the user to compare a DNA sequence with 
every sequence in GenBank, base by base. A researcher might 
search for similar regions in other genes of the same species 
or among the genes of other species. Another program allows 
comparison of protein sequences. A third program can search 
any protein sequence for conserved (common) stretches of 
amino acids (domains) for which a function is known or 
suspected, and it can show a three-dimensional model of the 
domain alongside other relevant information (Figure 20.3). 
There are even various software programs that can align and 
compare a collection of sequences, either nucleic acids or 
polypeptides, and diagram them in the form of an evolution-
ary tree based on the sequence relationships. (One such dia-
gram is shown in Figure 20.17.)
Two research institutions, Rutgers University and the 
University of California, San Diego, also maintain a world-
wide database of all three-dimensional protein structures that 
have been experimentally determined, called the Protein 
Data Bank (www.wwpdb.org). These structures can be rotated 
by the viewer to show all sides of the protein. Throughout 
this book, you’ll find images of protein structures that have 
been obtained from the Protein Data Bank.
There is a vast array of resources available for researchers any-
where in the world to use free of charge. Let us now consider the 
types of questions scientists can address using these resources.
 Instructors: BLAST Data Analysis Tutorials, which teach 
students how to work with real data from the BLAST database, 
can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
These technological advances have also facilitated an 
approach called metagenomics (from the Greek meta, 
beyond), in which DNA from an entire community of species 
(a metagenome) is collected from an environmental sample 
and sequenced. Again, computer software sorts out the partial 
sequences and assembles them into the individual species’ 
partial of complete genomes. An advantage of this technique 
is the ability to sequence the DNA of mixed microbial popu-
lations, which eliminates the need to culture each species 
separately in the lab, a challenge that has limited the study 
of microorganisms. So far, this approach has been applied to 
communities found in environments as diverse as the human 
intestine and extreme habitats like thermal springs where the 
temperature exceeds 80°C.
At first glance, genome sequences of humans and other 
organisms are simply dry lists of nucleotide bases—millions 
of A’s, T’s, C’s, and G’s in mind-numbing succession. Making 
sense of this massive amount of data has called for new 
analytical approaches, which we discuss next.
CONCEPT CHECK 20.1
1. Describe the whole-genome shotgun approach.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Scientists use bioinformatics 
to analyze genomes and their 
functions
Each of the 20 or so sequencing centers around the world 
working on the Human Genome Project churned out volu-
minous amounts of DNA sequence day after day. As the data 
began to accumulate, the need to coordinate efforts to keep 
track of all the sequences became clear. Thanks to the fore-
sight of research scientists and government officials involved 
in the Human Genome Project, its goals included establish-
ing centralized databases and refining analytical software, all 
made readily accessible on the Internet.
CONCEPT 20.2
 Mastering Biology  
HHMI Video: Leading Edge Bioinformatics  
Centralized Resources for Analyzing 
Genome Sequences
Making bioinformatics resources available to researchers 
worldwide and speeding up the dissemination of informa-
tion served to accelerate progress in DNA sequence analysis. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   478 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 480 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 479
Although the identities of about half of the human genes 
were known before the Human Genome Project began, the 
other genes, previously unknown, were revealed by DNA 
sequence analysis. Once such suspected genes are identified, 
the second step is to obtain clues about their identities and 
functions. Software is used to compare their sequences with 
those of known genes from other organisms. Due to redun-
dancy in the genetic code, the DNA sequence itself may vary 
more among species than the protein sequence does. Thus, 
scientists interested in proteins often compare the predicted 
amino acid sequence of a protein to that of other proteins. 
The final step is to confirm the identities of these genes 
using RNA-seq (see Figure 19.12) or some other method to 
show that the relevant RNA is actually expressed from the 
proposed gene.
 Mastering Biology Animation: The Human Genome Project:  
Genes on Human Chromosome 17
Sometimes a newly identified sequence will match, at 
least partially, the sequence of a gene or protein in another 
species whose function is well known. For example, a plant 
researcher working on signaling pathways in the muskmelon 
would be excited to see that a partial amino acid sequence 
from a gene she had identified matched sequences in other 
Identifying Protein-Coding Genes and 
Understanding Their Functions
Using available DNA sequences, geneticists can study genes 
directly, rather than taking the classical genetic approach, 
which requires determining the function of an unknown gene 
from the phenotype. But this more recent approach poses 
a new challenge: What does the gene actually do? Given a 
long DNA sequence from a database like GenBank, scientists 
aim to identify all protein-coding genes in the sequence 
and ultimately their functions. This process, called gene 
annotation, uses three lines of evidence to identify a gene.
First, computers are utilized in a search for patterns that 
indicate the presence of genes. The usual approach is to use 
software to scan the stored sequences for those that repre-
sent transcriptional and translational start and stop signals, 
RNA-splicing sites, and other telltale signs of protein-coding 
genes, such as promoter sequences. The software also looks 
for certain short sequences that specify known mRNAs. 
Thousands of such sequences, called expressed sequence tags, 
or ESTs, have been collected from cDNA sequences and are 
cataloged in computer databases. This type of analysis identi-
fies sequences that may turn out to be previously unknown 
protein-coding genes.
WD40 - Cn3D 4.1
CDD Descriptive Items
WD40 - Sequence Alignment Viewer
WD40 domain, found in a number 
of eukaryotic proteins that cover
a wide variety of functions 
including adaptor/regulatory 
modules in signal transduction, 
pre-mRNA processing and 
cytoskeleton assembly; typically 
contains a GH dipeptide 11-24 
residues from its N-terminus and 
the WD dipeptide at its 
C-terminus and is 40 residues 
long, hence the name WD40;
Name:  WD40
Cow [transducin]
Mustard weed [transducin]
Corn [GNB protein]
Human [PAFA protein]
Nematode [unknown protein #1]
Nematode [unknown protein #2]
Fission yeast [FWDR protein]
This window 
displays informa-
tion about the 
WD40 domain
from the 
Conserved 
Domain Database 
(CDD), which can 
find and describe 
similar domains in 
related proteins.
1     In this window, a partial amino acid sequence 
from an unknown muskmelon protein (”Query”) is 
aligned with sequences from other proteins that 
the program found to be similar. Each sequence 
represents a domain called WD40.
     Four hallmarks of the WD40 domain are 
highlighted in yellow. (Sequence similarity is 
based on chemical aspects of the amino acids, 
so the amino acids in each hallmark region 
are not always identical.)
     The Cn3D (”See in 3D”) 
program displays 3D models 
of domains, such as this 
ribbon model of cow 
transducin (the protein 
highlighted in purple in the 
Sequence Alignment Viewer). 
This protein is the only one 
of those shown for which a 
structure has been deter-
mined. The sequence 
similarity of the other 
proteins to cow transducin 
suggests that their 
structures are likely to be 
similar.
2
3
     Cow transducin contains 
seven WD40 domains, one of 
which is highlighted here in 
gray.
4
6
     The yellow segments corre-
spond to the WD40 hallmarks 
highlighted in yellow in the 
window above.
5
~nvrvSRELA~GHtgyLSCCRFLDd~~nQIVTs~~Sg~DTTCALWDie~
gtvpvSRMLT~GHrgyVSCCQYVPnedaHLITs~~Sg~DQTCILWDvtt
gnmpvSRILT~GHkgyVSSCQYVPdgetRLITS~~Sg~DQTCVLWDvt~
~~~ecIRTMH~GHdhnVSSVAIMPng~dHIVSA~~Sr~DKTIKMWEvg~
~~~rcVKTLK~GHtnyVFCCCFNPs~~gTLIAS~~GsfDETIRIWCar~
~~~rmTKTLK~GHnnyVFCCNFNPq~~sSLVVS~~GsfDESVRIWDvk~
~~~seCISILhGHtdsVLCLTFDS~~~~TLLVS~~GsaDCTVKLWHfs~
~~~ktGGIRL~RHfksVSAVEWHRk~~gDYLSTlvLreSRAVLIHQlsk
. Figure 20.3 National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website. Some results are shown 
from a search for regions of proteins similar to an amino acid sequence in a muskmelon protein.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   479 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 481 ===

480 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Perhaps the most striking finding was that about 75% of the 
human genome is transcribed at some point in at least one of 
the cell types studied, even though less than 2% codes for pro-
teins. Furthermore, biochemical functions have been assigned 
to DNA elements making up at least 80% of the genome. To 
learn more about the different types of functional elements, 
parallel projects analyzed in a similar way the genomes of two 
model organisms, the soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans 
and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Because genetic and 
biochemical experiments using DNA technology can be per-
formed on these species, testing the activities of potentially 
functional DNA elements in their genomes is expected to 
illuminate the workings of the human genome.
Because the ENCODE project analyzed cells in culture, its 
potential for clinical applications was limited. A related proj-
ect called the Roadmap Epigenomics Project set out to char-
acterize the epigenome—the epigenetic features of the genome 
of hundreds of human cell types and tissues. The aim was to 
focus on the epigenomes of stem cells, normal tissues from 
mature adults, and relevant tissues from individuals with dis-
eases such as cancer and neurodegenerative and autoimmune 
disorders. In 2015, a series of papers reported on the results 
from 111 tissues. One of the most useful findings was that 
the original tissue in which a cancer arose can be identified in 
cells of a secondary tumor based on characterization of their 
epigenomes.
Systems Biology
The scientific progress resulting from sequencing genomes 
and studying large sets of genes has encouraged scientists 
to attempt similar systematic studies of sets of proteins 
and their properties (such as their abundance, chemical 
modifications, and interactions), an approach called 
proteomics. (A proteome is the entire set of proteins 
expressed by a cell or group of cells.) Proteins, not the 
genes that encode them, carry out most of the activities of 
the cell. Therefore, if we are to understand the function-
ing of cells and organisms, we must study when and where 
proteins are produced in an organism, as well as how they 
interact in networks.
Genomics and proteomics enable molecular biolo-
gists to approach the study of life from an increasingly 
integrated perspective. Using the tools we have described, 
biologists have begun to compile catalogs of genes and 
proteins, listing all the “parts” that contribute to the 
operation of cells, tissues, and organisms. With such 
catalogs in hand, researchers have shifted their atten-
tion from the individual parts—genes and proteins—to 
their functional integration in biological systems. As you 
may recall, Concept 1.1 discussed this approach, called 
systems biology, which aims to model the dynamic 
behavior of whole biological systems based on the study of 
species encoding a functional part of a protein called a WD40 
domain (see Figure 20.3). WD40 domains are present in many 
eukaryotic proteins and are known to function in signal 
transduction pathways. Alternatively, a new gene sequence 
might be similar to a previously encountered sequence whose 
function is still unknown. Another possibility is that the 
sequence is entirely unlike anything ever seen before. This 
was true for about a third of the genes of Escherichia coli when 
its genome was sequenced. In such cases, protein function is 
usually deduced through a combination of biochemical and 
functional studies. The biochemical approach aims to deter-
mine the three-dimensional structure of the protein as well as 
other attributes, such as potential binding sites for other mol-
ecules. Functional studies usually involve knocking out (block-
ing or disabling) the gene in an organism to see how the 
phenotype is affected. The CRISPR-Cas 9 system, described 
in Figure 17.28, is an example of an experimental technique 
used to block gene function.
Understanding Genes and Gene Expression 
at the Systems Level
The impressive computational power provided by the tools 
of bioinformatics allows the study of whole sets of genes and 
their interactions, as well as the comparison of genomes from 
different species. Genomics is a rich source of new insights into 
fundamental questions about genome organization, regulation 
of gene expression, embryonic development, and evolution.
One informative approach was taken by a long-term 
research project called ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements), which began in 2003. The aim of the project is 
to learn everything possible about the functionally impor-
tant elements in the human genome, at first using multiple 
experimental techniques on different types of cultured 
cells. Investigators sought to identify protein-coding genes 
and genes for noncoding RNAs, along with sequences that 
regulate gene expression, such as enhancers and promot-
ers. In addition, they extensively characterized DNA and 
histone modifications and chromatin structure—features 
termed “epigenetic” since they affect gene expression 
without changing the sequence of nucleotide bases (see 
Concept 18.3). The second phase of the project, involving 
more than 440 scientists in 32 research groups, culminated 
in 2012 with the simultaneous publication of 30 papers 
describing over 1,600 large data sets. Now in its fourth phase, 
the ENCODE project is expanding its analysis of the human 
genome and that of the mouse (a mammalian model organ-
ism), seeking to identify regulatory and other important 
sequences. The considerable power of ENCODE has been 
that it provides the opportunity to compare results from spe-
cific projects with each other, yielding a much richer picture 
of the human and mouse genomes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   480 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 482 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 481
Application of Systems Biology to Medicine
The Cancer Genome Atlas began in 2007 and culminated 
in 2018 with publications called the Pan-Cancer Atlas. This 
project is another example of systems biology in which many 
interacting genes and gene products are analyzed together as 
a group. Under the joint leadership of the National Cancer 
Institute and the NIH, the project aimed to determine how 
changes in biological systems lead to cancer. A pilot project 
set out to find all the common mutations in three types of 
cancer—lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and glioblastoma of the 
brain—by comparing gene sequences and patterns of gene 
expression in cancer cells with those in normal cells. Work on 
glioblastoma confirmed the role of several suspected genes 
and identified a few previously unknown ones, suggesting 
possible new targets for therapies.
As high-throughput techniques become more rapid and 
less expensive, they are increasingly being applied to the prob-
lem of cancer. The approach described previously proved so 
fruitful for those three types of cancer that it was extended to 
ten other types, chosen because they are common and often 
lethal in humans, as well as to metastatic tumors (see Figure 
12.20), those that have dispersed from primary tumors and 
invaded organs far away in the body. Ninety percent of cancer 
deaths are primarily caused by metastasis. Results from the 
study of metastatic tumors, published in 2017, highlighted 
several key genes whose mutations were frequently found in 
the interactions among the system’s parts. Because of the 
vast amounts of data generated in these types of studies, 
advances in computer technology and bioinformatics are 
crucial to studying systems biology.
One important use of the systems biology approach is 
to define gene and protein interaction networks. To map 
the protein interaction network in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, for instance, researchers used sophisticated tech-
niques to knock out pairs of genes, one pair at a time, creat-
ing doubly mutant cells. They then compared the fitness 
of each double mutant (based in part on the size of the cell 
colony it formed) to that predicted from the fitness of each 
of the two single mutants. The researchers reasoned that 
if the observed fitness matched the prediction, then the 
products of the two genes didn’t interact with each other, 
but if the observed fitness was greater or less than predicted, 
then the gene products interacted in the cell. They then 
used computer software to build a graphic model by “map-
ping” the gene products to certain locations in the model, 
based on the similarity of their interactions. This resulted 
in the network-like “functional map” of protein interac-
tions shown in Figure 20.4. Processing the vast number of 
protein-protein interactions generated by this experiment 
and integrating them into the completed map required 
powerful computers, mathematical tools, and newly 
developed software.
Translation and
ribosomal functions
RNA processing
Mitosis
Transcription and
chromatin-related
functions
Nuclear migration
and protein
degradation
DNA replication
and repair
Protein folding and
glycosylation;
cell wall biosynthesis
Secretion 
and vesicle 
transport
Metabolism
and amino acid
biosynthesis
Glutamate
biosynthesis
Serine-
related
biosynthesis
Amino acid
permease pathway
Vesicle 
fusion
Peroxisomal
functions
Mitochondrial
functions
Cell polarity and
morphogenesis
Nuclear- 
cytoplasmic
transport 
. Figure 20.4 The systems biology 
approach to protein interactions. This 
global protein interaction map shows the likely 
interactions (lines) among about 4,500 gene 
products (dots) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
the budding yeast. Dots of the same color 
represent gene products involved in one of 
the 13 similarly colored cellular functions 
listed around the map. The white dots 
represent proteins that haven’t been assigned 
to any color-coded function. The expanded 
area shows additional details of one map 
region where the gene products (blue dots) 
carry out amino acid biosynthesis, uptake, and 
related functions.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   481 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 483 ===

482 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
metastases and could be targets for chemotherapy. Overall, 
the Pan-Cancer Atlas contributed significantly to understand-
ing how, where, and why tumors arise, underscoring the value 
of an integrative systems biology approach to treating cancer.
In addition to whole-genome sequencing, DNA microarrays 
on glass or silicon chips (Figure 20.5) and, increasingly, RNA-
seq (see Figure 19.12) are used to analyze gene expression pat-
terns in patients who have various cancers and other diseases. 
Analyzing which genes are overexpressed or underexpressed 
in a particular cancer allows physicians to tailor patients’ treat-
ment to their unique genetic makeup and the specifics of their 
cancers. This approach has been used to characterize subsets 
of particular cancers, enabling more refined treatments. Breast 
cancer is one example (see Figure 18.27).
Eventually, medical records may include an individual’s 
DNA sequence, a sort of genetic bar code, with regions high-
lighted that predispose the person to specific diseases. The use 
of such sequences for personalized medicine—disease preven-
tion and treatment—has great potential.
Systems biology is a very efficient way to study emergent 
properties at the molecular level. Novel properties arise at each 
successive level of biological complexity as a result of the arrange-
ment of building blocks at the underlying level (see Concept 1.1). 
The more we can learn about the arrangement and interactions 
of the components of genetic systems, the deeper will be our 
understanding of whole organisms. The rest of this chapter sur-
veys what we’ve learned from genomic studies.
b Figure 20.5 A human gene 
microarray chip. Tiny spots of DNA 
arranged in a grid on this silicon wafer 
represent almost all of the genes in 
the human genome. Using this chip, 
researchers can analyze expression 
patterns for all these genes at the same 
time (see Figure 19.13).
 Mastering Biology 
HHMI Animation: Gene  
Chip Manufacturing 
CONCEPT CHECK 20.2
1. What are the ways by which the functions of newly 
sequenced genes can be ascertained?
2. Explain the advantage of the systems biology approach to 
studying cancer versus the approach of studying a single 
gene at a time.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS The ENCODE pilot project found 
that at least 75% of the genome is transcribed into RNAs, 
far more than could be accounted for by protein-coding 
genes. Review Concepts 17.3 and 18.3 and suggest some 
roles that these RNAs might play.
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS In Concept 19.2, you learned about 
genome-wide association studies. Explain how these studies 
use the systems biology approach.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 20.3
Genomes vary in size, number  
of genes, and gene density
The sequences of thousands of genomes have been completed, 
with tens of thousands of genomes either in progress or consid-
ered permanent drafts (because they require more work than it 
would be worth to complete them). Among the sequences in 
progress are roughly 22,000 metagenomes. In the completely 
sequenced group, about 137,500 are genomes of bacteria, and 
1,200 are archaeal genomes. There are 430 completed eukary-
otic species, along with 4,500 permanent drafts. Among these 
are vertebrates, invertebrates, protists, fungi, and plants. Next, 
we’ll discuss what we’ve learned about genome size, number of 
genes, and gene density, focusing on general trends.
Genome Size
Comparing the three domains (Bacteria, Archaea, and 
Eukarya), we find a general difference in genome size 
between prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Table 20.1). While 
Organism
Haploid 
Genome 
Size (Mb)
Number 
of Genes
Genes 
per Mb
Bacteria
Haemophilus influenzae 1.8 1,700 940
Escherichia coli 4.6 4,400 950
Archaea
Archaeoglobus fulgidus 2.2 2,500 1,130
Methanosarcina barkeri 4.8 3,600 750
Eukaryotes
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
(yeast, a fungus)
12 6,300 525
Utricularia gibba 
(floating bladderwort)
82 28,500 348
Caenorhabditis elegans 
(nematode)
100 20,100 200
Arabidopsis thaliana 
(mustard family plant)
120 27,000 225
Drosophila melanogaster 
(fruit fly)
165 14,000 85
Daphnia pulex (water flea) 200 31,000 155
Zea mays (corn) 2,300 32,000 14
Ailuropoda melanoleuca 
(giant panda)
2,400 21,000 9
Homo sapiens (human) 3,000 21,300 7
Paris japonica  
(Japanese canopy plant)
149,000 ND ND
*Some values given here are likely to be revised as genome analysis 
continues. Mb = million base pairs; the haploid number is used because it 
represents a complete set of genetic information. ND = not determined.
Table 20.1 G e n o m e  S i z e s  a n d  E s t i m a t e d  N u m b e r s  o f  G e n e s *
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   482 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 484 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 483
there are some exceptions, most bacterial genomes have 
between 1 and 6 million base pairs (Mb); for example, 
the genome of E. coli has 4.6 Mb. Genomes of archaea are 
mostly within the size range of bacterial genomes. (Keep in 
mind, however, that many fewer archaeal genomes have 
been completely sequenced, so this picture may change.) 
Eukaryotic genomes tend to be larger: The genome of the 
single-celled yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (a fungus) has 
about 12 Mb, while most animals and plants, which are 
multicellular, have genomes of at least 100 Mb. There 
are 165 Mb in the fruit fly genome, while humans have 
3,000 Mb, about 500 to 3,000 times as many as a typical 
bacterium.
Aside from this general difference between prokary-
otes and eukaryotes, a comparison of genome sizes among 
eukaryotes fails to reveal any systematic relationship between 
genome size and the organism’s phenotype. For instance, 
the range among plants is enormous: The genome of Paris 
japonica, the Japanese canopy plant, contains 149 bil-
lion base pairs (149,000 Mb), while that of another plant, 
Utricularia gibba, a bladderwort, contains only 82 Mb. Even 
more striking, there is a single-celled amoeba, Polychaos 
dubium, whose genome size has been estimated at 670 billion 
base pairs (670,000 Mb). (This genome has not yet been 
sequenced.) On a finer scale, comparing two insect spe-
cies, the cricket (Anabrus simplex) genome turns out to 
have 11 times as many base pairs as the fruit fly (Drosophila 
melanogaster) genome. There is a wide range of genome sizes 
within the groups of protists, insects, amphibians, and plants 
and less of a range within mammals and reptiles.
Number of Genes
The number of genes also varies between prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes: Bacteria and archaea, in general, have fewer genes 
than eukaryotes. Free-living bacteria and archaea have from 
1,500 to 7,500 genes, while the number of genes in eukary-
otes ranges from about 5,000 for unicellular fungi (yeasts) to 
at least 40,000 for some multicellular eukaryotes.
Within the eukaryotes, the number of genes in a species is 
often lower than expected from considering simply the size 
of its genome. Looking at Table 20.1, you can see that the 
genome of the nematode C. elegans is 100 Mb in size and con-
tains roughly 20,100 genes. In comparison, the genome of 
Drosophila melanogaster is much bigger (165 Mb) but has only 
about two-thirds the number of genes—14,000 genes.
Considering an example closer to home, we noted that 
the human genome contains 3,000 Mb, well over ten times 
the size of either the D. melanogaster or C. elegans genome. 
At the outset of the Human Genome Project, biologists 
expected somewhere between 50,000 and 100,000 genes to 
be identified in the completed sequence, based on the num-
ber of known human proteins. As the project progressed, the 
estimate was revised downward several times. There is still 
debate about the number, but it is much lower, probably 
around 21,300. This estimate, similar to the number of genes 
in the nematode C. elegans, surprised biologists, who had 
been expecting many more human genes.
What genetic attributes allow humans (and other verte-
brates) to get by with no more genes than nematodes? An 
important factor is that vertebrate genomes “get more bang 
for the buck” from their coding sequences because of exten-
sive alternative splicing of RNA transcripts. Recall that this 
process generates more than one polypeptide from a single 
gene (see Figure 18.14). A typical human gene contains about 
ten exons, and an estimated 90% or more of these multi-exon 
genes are spliced in at least two different ways. Some genes 
are expressed in hundreds of alternatively spliced forms, oth-
ers in just two. Scientists have not yet catalogued all of the 
different forms, but it is clear that the number of different 
proteins encoded in the human genome far exceeds the pro-
posed number of genes.
Additional polypeptide diversity could result from 
post-translational modifications such as cleavage or the 
addition of carbohydrate groups in different cell types or 
at different developmental stages. Finally, the discovery 
of miRNAs and other RNAs that play regulatory roles has 
added a new variable to the mix (see Concept 18.3). Some 
scientists think that this added level of regulation of some 
genes, when present, may contribute to greater organismal 
complexity.
Gene Density and Noncoding DNA
We can take both genome size and number of genes into 
account by comparing gene density in different species. 
In other words, we can ask how many genes are in a given 
length of DNA. When we compare the genomes of bacteria, 
archaea, and eukaryotes, we see that eukaryotes generally 
have larger genomes but fewer genes in a given number of 
base pairs. Humans have hundreds or thousands of times 
as many base pairs in their genome as most bacteria, as we 
already noted, but only 5 to 15 times as many genes; thus, 
gene density is lower in humans (see Table 20.1). Even uni-
cellular eukaryotes, such as yeasts, have fewer genes per 
million base pairs than bacteria and archaea. Among the 
genomes that have been sequenced completely, humans 
and other mammals have the lowest gene density.
In all bacterial genomes studied so far, most of the DNA 
consists of genes for protein, tRNA, or rRNA; the small 
amount remaining consists mainly of nontranscribed 
regulatory sequences, such as promoters. The sequence of 
nucleotides along a bacterial protein-coding gene is not 
interrupted by noncoding sequences (introns). In eukaryotic 
genomes, by contrast, most of the DNA neither encodes 
protein nor is transcribed into RNA molecules of known 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   483 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 485 ===

484 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
function, and the DNA includes more complex regulatory 
sequences. In fact, humans have 10,000 times as much 
noncoding DNA as bacteria. Some of this DNA in multicel-
lular eukaryotes is present as introns within genes. Indeed, 
introns account for most of the difference in average length 
between human genes (27,000 base pairs) and bacterial 
genes (1,000 base pairs).
In addition to introns, multicellular eukaryotes have a 
vast amount of non-protein-coding DNA between genes. 
In the next section, we will describe the composition and 
arrangement of these great stretches of DNA in the human 
genome.
CONCEPT CHECK 20.3
1. Eukaryotes such as humans have around 21,000 genes  
and 7 genes per megabase. Prokaryotes such as E. coli,  
on the other hand, have 4,400 genes and 950 genes per 
megabase. What accounts for the lower gene density  
in eukaryotes?
2. The Genomes Online Database (GOLD) website of the 
Joint Genome Institute has information about genome 
sequencing projects. Scroll through the page at https://
gold.jgi.doe.gov/statistics and describe the information 
you find. What percent of bacterial genome projects have 
medical relevance?
3. WHAT IF? What evolutionary processes might account for 
prokaryotes having smaller genomes than eukaryotes?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Multicellular eukaryotes have a 
lot of noncoding DNA and many 
multigene families
We have spent most of our time focusing on genes that code 
for proteins. Yet the coding regions of these genes and the 
genes for small RNAs like tRNAs make up a small portion of 
most multicellular eukaryotic genomes. For example, only a 
tiny part—about 1.5%—codes for proteins or is transcribed 
into rRNAs or tRNAs. Figure 20.6 shows what is known about 
the makeup of the remaining 98.5% of the genome.
Gene-related regulatory sequences and introns account, 
respectively, for 5% and about 20%, respectively, of the 
human genome. The rest, located between functional genes, 
includes some unique (single-copy) noncoding DNA, such as 
gene fragments and pseudogenes, former genes that have 
accumulated mutations over a long time and no longer pro-
duce functional proteins. (The genes that produce small non-
coding RNAs are a tiny percentage of the genome, distributed 
between the 20% introns and the 15% unique noncoding 
DNA.) Most of the DNA between functional genes, however, 
is repetitive DNA, which consists of sequences that are 
present in multiple copies in the genome.
Repetitive
DNA that
includes
transposable
elements
and related
sequences 
(44%)
Exons (regions of genes 
coding for protein or giving 
rise to rRNA or tRNA) (1.5%)
Regulatory 
sequences (5%)
Introns
(~20%)
Simple sequence
DNA (3%)
Alu elements
(10%)
L1
sequences
(17%)
Large-segment
duplications (5–6%)
Unique
noncoding
DNA (15%)Repetitive
DNA
unrelated to
transposable
elements
(14%)
. Figure 20.6 Types of DNA sequences in the human genome. 
The gene sequences that code for proteins or are transcribed into 
rRNA or tRNA molecules make up only about 1.5% of the human 
genome (dark purple in the pie chart), while introns and regulatory 
sequences associated with genes (lighter purple) make up about 
a quarter. The vast majority of the human genome does not code 
for proteins (although much of it gives rise to RNAs), and a large 
amount is repetitive DNA (dark and light green and teal).
The bulk of many eukaryotic genomes consists of DNA 
sequences that neither code for proteins nor are transcribed 
to produce RNAs with known functions; this noncoding DNA 
was often described in the past as “junk DNA.” However, 
genome comparisons over the past ten years have revealed the 
persistence of this DNA in diverse genomes over many hun-
dreds of generations. For example, the genomes of humans, 
rats, and mice contain almost 500 regions of noncoding DNA 
that are identical in sequence in all three species. This is a 
higher level of sequence conservation than is seen for protein-
coding regions in these species, strongly suggesting that the 
noncoding regions have important functions. The results of 
the ENCODE project discussed earlier have underscored the 
key roles played by much of this noncoding DNA. Next, we’ll 
examine how genes and noncoding DNA sequences are orga-
nized within genomes of multicellular eukaryotes, using the 
human genome as our main example. Genome organization 
tells us a lot about how genomes have evolved and continue 
to evolve, as we’ll see in Concept 20.5.
CONCEPT 20.4
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation:  
Coding Sequences in DNA 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   484 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 486 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 485
mechanism, which removes the element from the original 
site, or by a “copy-and-paste” mechanism, which leaves a copy 
behind (Figure 20.8). Both mechanisms require an enzyme 
called transposase, which is generally encoded by the transposon.
Most transposable elements in eukaryotic genomes are of 
the second type, retrotransposons, which move by means 
of an RNA intermediate that is a transcript of the retrotrans-
poson DNA. Thus, retrotransposons always leave a copy at 
the original site during transposition (Figure 20.9). To insert 
at another site, the RNA intermediate is first converted back 
to DNA by reverse transcriptase, an enzyme encoded by the 
retrotransposon. (Reverse transcriptase is also encoded by 
retroviruses, which are discussed in Concept 26.2. In fact, 
retroviruses may have evolved from retrotransposons, or vice 
versa.) Another cellular enzyme catalyzes insertion of the 
reverse-transcribed DNA at a new site.
Transposable Elements and Related 
Sequences
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have stretches of DNA that 
can move from one location to another within the genome. 
These stretches are known as transposable genetic elements, or 
simply transposable elements. During the process called 
transposition, a transposable element moves from one site in a 
cell’s DNA to a different target site by a type of recombination 
process. Transposable elements are sometimes called “jump-
ing genes,” but actually they never entirely detach from 
the cell’s DNA. Instead, the original and new DNA sites are 
brought very close together by enzymes and other proteins 
that bend the DNA. Surprisingly, about 75% of human repeti-
tive DNA (44% of the entire human genome) is made up of 
transposable elements and sequences related to them.
The first evidence for wandering DNA segments came 
from American geneticist Barbara McClintock’s breeding 
experiments with calico corn (maize) in the 1940s and 1950s 
(Figure 20.7). Tracking corn plants through many genera-
tions, McClintock analyzed changes in the color of corn ker-
nels. The patterns she saw led her to propose that there were 
genetic elements capable of moving from other locations in 
the genome into the genes for kernel color, disrupting the 
genes and changing the kernel color. McClintock’s hypoth-
esis provoked great interest among her maize colleagues, 
but most other scientists thought the phenomenon she had 
observed might occur only in maize. Her careful work and 
insightful ideas were finally validated many years later when 
transposable elements were found in bacteria. In 1983, at the 
age of 81, McClintock received the Nobel Prize for her pio-
neering research.
Movement of Transposons and Retrotransposons
Eukaryotic transposable elements are of two types. The first 
type, transposons, move within a genome by means of a 
DNA intermediate. Transposons can move by a “cut-and-paste” 
b Figure 20.7 The effect of 
transposable elements on corn 
kernel color. Barbara McClintock 
first proposed the idea of mobile 
genetic elements after observing 
variegations in the color of the 
kernels on a corn cob (top right).
DNA of 
genome
Transposon
Mobile copy of transposon
Transposon
is copied
New copy of
transposon
Insertion
. Figure 20.8 Transposon movement. Movement of 
transposons by either the copy-and-paste mechanism (shown here) 
or the cut-and-paste mechanism involves a double-stranded DNA 
intermediate that is inserted into the genome.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Virginia Walbot: Plant  
genetics and development
DNA
DNA
DNA
Mobile copy of retrotransposon
RNA
RNA
Retrotransposon New copy of
retrotransposonSynthesis of a
single-stranded
RNA intermediate
Insertion
Reverse transcriptase synthesizes 
a DNA strand complementary to 
the RNA strand.
Reverse transcriptase synthesizes 
a second DNA strand complemen-
tary to the first DNA strand.
. Figure 20.9 Retrotransposon movement. Movement 
begins with synthesis of a single-stranded RNA intermediate. The 
remaining steps are essentially identical to part of the retrovirus 
replicative cycle (see Figure 26.8).
VISUAL SKILLS How would this figure differ if it showed the 
cut-and-paste mechanism?
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   485 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 487 ===

486 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
same or a different chromosome and probably include some 
functional genes.
In contrast to scattered copies of long sequences, stretches 
of DNA known as simple sequence DNA contain many 
copies of tandemly repeated short sequences, as in the follow-
ing example (showing one DNA strand only):
. . . GTTACGTTACGTTACGTTACGTTACGTTAC. . .
In this case, the repeated unit (GTTAC) consists of 5 
nucleotides, but the number can range from 2 to 500. When 
the unit contains 2–5 nucleotides, the series of repeats is 
called a short tandem repeat, or STR; we discussed the 
use of STR analysis in preparing genetic profiles by use of 
PCR in Concept 19.4 (see Figure 19.24). The number of cop-
ies of the repeated unit can vary from site to site within a 
given genome. There could be as many as several hundred 
thousand repetitions of the GTTAC unit at one site, but 
only half that number at another. STR analysis is performed 
on sites selected because they have relatively few repeats. 
The repeat number varies from person to person, and since 
humans are diploid, each person has two alleles per repeat 
site; these can differ in repeat number. This diversity pro-
duces the variation represented in the genetic profiles that 
result from STR analysis.
Simple sequence DNA makes up 3% of the human 
genome, much of it located at chromosomal telomeres and 
centromeres, where it may play a structural role. The DNA 
at centromeres is essential for the separation of chromatids 
in cell division (see Concept 12.2) and, along with simple 
sequence DNA located elsewhere, may also help organize 
the chromatin within the interphase nucleus. The simple 
sequence DNA located at telomeres binds proteins that pro-
tect chromosomal ends from degradation and from joining to 
other chromosomes.
Short repetitive sequences like those described here 
provide a challenge for whole-genome shotgun sequenc-
ing because the presence of many short repeats hinders 
accurate reassembly of fragment sequences by computers. 
Regions of simple sequence DNA account for much of 
the uncertainty present in estimates of whole-genome 
sizes and are the reason some sequences are considered 
“permanent drafts.”
Genes and Multigene Families
Now, let’s take a look at genes. Recall that DNA sequences 
that code for proteins or give rise to tRNA or rRNA make 
up only 1.5% of the human genome (see Figure 20.6). If we 
include introns and regulatory sequences, the total amount 
of DNA that is gene-related—coding and noncoding—
constitutes about 25% of the human genome. Put another 
way, only about 6% (1.5% out of 25%) of the length of the 
average gene is represented in the final gene product.
Sequences Related to Transposable Elements
Multiple copies of transposable elements and sequences 
related to them are scattered throughout eukaryotic 
genomes. A single unit is usually hundreds to thousands 
of base pairs long, and the dispersed copies are similar but 
usually not identical to each other. Some of these are trans-
posable elements that can move; the enzymes required for 
this movement may be encoded by any transposable ele-
ment, including the one that is moving. Others are related 
sequences that have lost the ability to move altogether. 
Transposable elements and related sequences make up 
25–50% of most mammalian genomes (see Figure 20.6) and 
even higher percentages in amphibians and many plants. In 
fact, the very large size of some plant genomes is accounted 
for by extra transposable elements rather than by extra 
genes. For example, transposable elements make up 85% of 
the corn genome!
In humans and other primates, a large portion of trans-
posable element–related DNA consists of a family of similar 
sequences called Alu elements. These sequences alone account 
for approximately 10% of the human genome. Alu elements 
are about 300 nucleotides long, much shorter than most 
functional transposable elements, and they do not code for 
any protein. However, many Alu elements are transcribed 
into RNA, and at least some of these RNAs are thought to help 
regulate gene expression.
An even larger percentage (17%) of the human genome 
is made up of a type of retrotransposon called LINE-1, or L1. 
These sequences are much longer than Alu elements—about 
6,500 base pairs—and typically have a very low rate of trans-
position. However, researchers working with mice have dis-
covered that transcription of L1 retrotransposons is crucial for 
the development of early (one- and two-cell stage) embryos. 
They have proposed that transcription of L1 retrotransposons 
may affect the chromatin structure in ways important for 
embryonic development.
Although some transposable elements encode proteins, 
these proteins do not carry out normal cellular functions. 
Therefore, transposable elements are usually included in 
the “noncoding” DNA category, along with other repetitive 
sequences.
Other Repetitive DNA, Including Simple 
Sequence DNA
Repetitive DNA that is not related to transposable elements 
has probably arisen from mistakes during DNA replication 
or recombination. Such DNA accounts for about 14% of 
the human genome (see Figure 20.6). About a third of this 
(5–6% of the human genome) consists of duplications of 
long stretches of DNA, with each unit ranging from 10,000 to 
300,000 base pairs. These long segments seem to have been 
copied from one chromosomal location to another site on the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   486 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 488 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 487
Many eukaryotic genes are present as unique sequences, 
with only one copy per haploid set of chromosomes. But in 
the human genome and the genomes of many other ani-
mals and plants, these unique genes make up less than half 
of the total gene-related DNA. The rest occur in multigene 
families, collections of two or more identical or very simi-
lar genes.
In multigene families that consist of identical DNA 
sequences, those sequences are usually clustered tandemly 
and, with the notable exception of the genes for histone 
proteins, have RNAs as their final products. An example is 
the family of identical DNA sequences that each include the 
genes for the three largest rRNA molecules (Figure 20.10a). 
These rRNA molecules are transcribed from a single transcrip-
tion unit that is repeated tandemly hundreds to thousands of 
times in one or several clusters in the genome of a multicel-
lular eukaryote. The many copies of this rRNA transcription 
unit help cells to quickly make the millions of ribosomes 
needed for active protein synthesis. The primary transcript is 
cleaved to yield three rRNA molecules, which combine with 
proteins and one other kind of rRNA (5S rRNA) to form ribo-
somal subunits.
The classic examples of multigene families of nonidentical 
genes are two related families of genes that encode globins, a 
group of proteins that include the a and b polypeptide sub-
units of hemoglobin. One family, located on chromosome 16 
in humans, encodes various forms of a-globin; the other, on 
chromosome 11, encodes forms of b-globin (Figure 20.10b). 
The different forms of each globin subunit are expressed at 
different times in development, allowing hemoglobin to 
function effectively in the changing environment of the 
developing animal. In humans, for example, the embryonic 
and fetal forms of hemoglobin have a higher affinity for oxy-
gen than the adult forms, ensuring the efficient transfer of 
oxygen from mother to fetus. Also found in the globin gene 
family clusters are several pseudogenes.
In Concept 20.5, we’ll consider the evolution of these 
two globin gene families as we explore how arrangements of 
genes provide insight into the evolution of genomes. We’ll 
also examine some processes that have shaped the genomes 
of different species over evolutionary time.
VISUAL SKILLS In the TEM at the top of part (a), how could you determine 
the direction of transcription if it weren’t indicated by the red arrow?
Transcription unit
Nontranscribed
spacer
DNA
RNA transcripts
Direction of transcription
DNA
rRNA
18S
28S
5.8S
c-Globin gene family d-Globin gene family
5.8S 28S
18S
(a) Part of the ribosomal RNA gene family. The TEM at the top 
shows three of the hundreds of copies of rRNA transcription 
units in the rRNA gene family of a salamander genome. Each 
”feather” corresponds to a single unit being transcribed by 
about 100 molecules of RNA polymerase (dark dots along the 
DNA), moving left to right (red arrow). The growing RNA 
transcripts extend from the DNA, accounting for the feather-like 
appearance. In the diagram of a transcription unit below the 
TEM, the genes for three types of rRNA (darker blue) are 
adjacent to regions that are transcribed but later removed 
(medium blue). A single transcript is processed to yield one of 
each of the three rRNAs (red), key components of the ribosome.
(b)
Embryo
Fetus
and adult
* df
Embryo
e*ec2
ec1
c2c1ew ed
Fetus Adult
Chromosome 16 Chromosome 11
Heme
c-Globin
c-Globin
d-Globin
d-Globin
GiAi
The human 5-globin and 6-globin gene families. Adult 
hemoglobin is composed of two c-globin and two d-globin 
polypeptide subunits, as shown in the molecular model. The 
genes (darker blue) encoding c- and d-globins are found in two 
families, organized as shown here. The noncoding DNA (light 
blue) separating the functional genes within each family includes 
pseudogenes (e; gold), versions of the functional genes that no 
longer encode functional polypeptides. Genes and pseudogenes 
are named with Greek letters, as you have seen previously for 
the c- and d-globins. Some genes are expressed only in the 
embryo or fetus. 
. Figure 20.10 Gene families.
CONCEPT CHECK 20.4
1. What is simple sequence DNA, and where is it located in a 
chromosome?
2. VISUAL SKILLS Which of the three mechanisms described 
in Figures 20.8 and 20.9 result(s) in a copy remaining at the 
original site as well as a copy appearing in a new location?
3. Contrast the organizations of the rRNA gene family and the 
globin gene families. For each, explain how the existence of 
a family of genes benefits the organism.
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Assign each DNA segment at the top 
of Figure 18.9 to a sector in the pie chart in Figure 20.6.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   487 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 489 ===

488 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Duplication, rearrangement,  
and mutation of DNA contribute 
to genome evolution
EVOLUTION Now that we have explored the makeup of the 
human genome, let’s see what its composition reveals about 
how the genome evolved. The basis of change at the genomic 
level is mutation, which underlies much of genome evolution. 
It seems likely that the earliest forms of life had a minimal 
number of genes—those necessary for survival and reproduc-
tion. If this were indeed the case, one aspect of evolution must 
have been an increase in the size of the genome, with the extra 
genetic material providing the raw material for gene diversi-
fication. In this section, we’ll first look at how extra copies of 
all or part of a genome can arise and then consider subsequent 
processes that can lead to the evolution of proteins (or RNA 
products) with slightly different or entirely new functions.
Duplication of Entire Chromosome Sets
An accident in meiosis, such as failure to separate homo-
logs during meiosis I, can result in one or more extra sets 
of chromosomes, a condition known as polyploidy (see 
Concept 15.4). Although such accidents would most often be 
lethal, in rare cases they could facilitate the evolution of genes. 
In a polyploid organism, one set of genes can provide essential 
functions for the organism. The genes in the one or more extra 
sets can diverge by accumulating mutations; these variations 
may persist if the organism carrying them survives and repro-
duces. In this way, genes with novel functions can evolve. As 
long as one copy of an essential gene is expressed, the diver-
gence of another copy can lead to its encoded protein acting in 
a novel way, thereby changing the organism’s phenotype.
The outcome of this accumulation of mutations may even-
tually be the branching off of a new species. While polyploidy 
is rare among animals, it is relatively common among plants, 
especially flowering plants. Some botanists estimate that as 
many as 80% of the plant species that are alive today show 
evidence of polyploidy having occurred among their ances-
tral species. You’ll learn more about the details of how poly-
ploidy leads to plant speciation in Concept 24.2.
Alterations of Chromosome Structure
With the recent explosion in genomic sequence informa-
tion, we can now compare the chromosomal organizations 
of many different species in detail. This information allows 
us to make inferences about the evolutionary processes that 
shape chromosomes and may drive speciation. For example, 
scientists have long known that sometime in the last 6 mil-
lion years, when the ancestors of humans and chimpanzees 
diverged as species, the fusion of two ancestral chromosomes 
CONCEPT 20.5
Human
chromosome
Chimpanzee
chromosomes
12
2 13
T elomere
sequences
Centromere
sequences
T elomere-like
sequences
Centromere-like
sequences
. Figure 20.11 Human and chimpanzee chromosomes. The 
positions of telomere-like and centromere-like sequences on human 
chromosome 2 (left) match those of telomeres on chimpanzee 
chromosomes 12 and 13 and the centromere on chimpanzee 
chromosome 13 (right). This suggests that chromosomes 12 and 
13 in a human ancestor fused end to end to form human 
chromosome 2. The centromere from ancestral chromosome 
12 remained functional on human chromosome 2, while the one 
from ancestral chromosome 13 did not.
in the human line led to different haploid numbers for 
humans (n = 23) and chimpanzees (n = 24). The banding pat-
terns in stained chromosomes suggested that the ancestral 
versions of current chimpanzee chromosomes 12 and 13 
fused end to end, forming chromosome 2 in an ancestor of 
the human lineage (Figure 20.11).
How do we know a chromosome didn’t just split into two in 
an ancestor of chimps? A comparison of chromosomes in other 
great apes—gorillas, chimps, bonobos, and orangutans, our clos-
est relatives—shows that those species have 24 chromosomes, 
so the simplest conclusion is that the last common ancestor of 
all great apes had 24 chromosomes. (You’ll learn more about 
this type of reasoning in Concept 22.3.) Sequencing and analysis 
of human chromosome 2 during the Human Genome Project 
revealed sequences for telomeres and an extra, unused centro-
mere in the middle of it, among other very strong supporting 
evidence for the model described previously (see Figure 20.11).
In another study of broader scope, researchers compared 
the DNA sequence of each human chromosome with the 
whole-genome sequence of the mouse (Figure 20.12). One 
part of their study showed that large blocks of genes on 
human chromosome 16 are found on four mouse chromo-
somes, indicating that the genes in each block stayed together 
in both the mouse and the human lineages during their diver-
gent evolution from a common ancestor.
Performing the same comparison of chromosomes of 
humans and six other mammalian species allowed the research-
ers to reconstruct the evolutionary history of chromosomal 
rearrangements in these eight species. They found many 
duplications and inversions of large portions of chromosomes, 
the result of errors during meiotic recombination in which 
the DNA was broken and rejoined incorrectly. The rate of 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   488 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 490 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 489
result, a segment of DNA is deleted or duplicated. It is easy to 
imagine how such errors could occur in regions of repeats. 
(See the question in Figure 20.13.) The variable number of 
repeated units of simple sequence DNA at a given site, used 
for STR analysis, is probably due to errors like these. Evidence 
that unequal crossing over and template slippage during DNA 
replication lead to duplication of genes is found in the exis-
tence of multigene families, such as the globin family.
Evolution of Genes with Related Functions:  
The Human Globin Genes
In Figure 20.10b, you saw the organization of the a-globin 
and b-globin gene families as they exist in the human 
genome today. Now, let’s consider how events such as dupli-
cations can lead to the evolution of genes with related func-
tions like the globin genes. A comparison of gene sequences 
within a multigene family can suggest the order in which 
the genes arose. Re-creating the evolutionary history of 
the globin genes using this approach indicates that they 
all evolved from one common ancestral globin gene that 
underwent duplication and divergence into the a-globin and 
b-globin ancestral genes about 450–500 million years ago 
these events seems to have begun accelerating about 100 mil-
lion years ago, around 35 million years before large dinosaurs 
became extinct and the number of mammalian species began 
rapidly increasing. The apparent coincidence is interesting 
because chromosomal rearrangements are thought to contrib-
ute to the generation of new species. Although two individu-
als with different arrangements could still mate and produce 
offspring, the offspring would have two nonequivalent sets of 
chromosomes, making meiosis inefficient or even impossible. 
Thus, chromosomal rearrangements would lead to two popula-
tions that could not successfully mate with each other, a step 
on the way to their becoming two separate species. (You’ll learn 
more about this in Concept 24.2.)
The same study also unearthed a pattern with medical rel-
evance. Analysis of the chromosomal breakage points associ-
ated with the rearrangements showed that specific sites were 
used over and over again. A number of these recombination 
“hot spots” correspond to locations of chromosomal rear-
rangements within the human genome that are associated 
with congenital diseases (see Concept 15.4).
Duplication and Divergence of Gene-Sized 
Regions of DNA
Errors during meiosis can also lead to the duplication of 
chromosomal regions that are smaller than the ones we’ve 
just discussed, including segments the length of individual 
genes. Unequal crossing over during prophase I of meiosis, 
for instance, can result in one chromosome with a deletion 
and another with a duplication of a particular gene or genes. 
Transposable elements can provide homologous sites where 
nonsister chromatids can cross over, even when other chro-
matid regions are not correctly aligned (Figure 20.13).
Also, slippage can occur during DNA replication, such that 
the template shifts with respect to the new complementary 
strand, and a part of the template strand is either skipped by 
the replication machinery or used twice as a template. As a 
Human chromosome Mouse chromosomes
7 8 1616 17
. Figure 20.12 Human and mouse chromosomes. Here, we 
can see that DNA sequences very similar to large blocks of human 
chromosome 16 (colored areas in this diagram) are found on mouse 
chromosomes 7, 8, 16, and 17. This finding suggests that the DNA 
sequence in each block has stayed together in the mouse and human 
lineages since the time they diverged from a common ancestor.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with Eric Lander:  
Exploring the human genome
MAKE CONNECTIONS Examine how crossing over occurs in  
Figure 13.9. In the middle panel above, draw a line through the portions 
that result in the upper chromatid in the bottom panel. Use a different 
color to do the same for the other chromatid.
Incorrect pairing
of two homologs
during meiosis
Crosssing over of
misaligned nonsister
chromatids
Chromatid with gene deleted
Chromatid with gene duplicated
Crossover
point
Nonsister
chromatids
Transposable
element
Gene
Homologous transposable elements
cause misaligned chromatids
and
. Figure 20.13 Gene duplication due to unequal crossing 
over. One mechanism by which a gene (or other DNA segment) 
can be duplicated is recombination during meiosis between 
copies of a transposable element (yellow) flanking the gene (blue). 
Such recombination between misaligned nonsister chromatids 
of homologous chromosomes produces one chromatid with two 
copies of the gene and one chromatid with no copy. (Genes and 
transposable elements are shown only in the region of interest.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   489 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 491 ===

490 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
(Figure 20.14). Each of these genes was later duplicated sev-
eral times, and the copies then diverged from each other in 
sequence, yielding the current family members. In fact, the 
common ancestral globin gene also gave rise to the oxygen-
binding muscle protein myoglobin and to the plant protein 
leghemoglobin. The latter two proteins function as mono-
mers, and their genes are included in a “globin superfamily.”
After the duplication events, the differences between the 
genes in the globin families undoubtedly arose from mutations 
that accumulated in the gene copies over many generations. 
The current model is that the necessary function provided by 
an a-globin protein, for example, was fulfilled by one gene, 
while other copies of the a-globin gene accumulated random 
mutations. Many mutations may have had an adverse effect 
on the organism, and others may have had no effect. However, 
a few mutations must have altered the function of the protein 
product in a way that benefitted the organism at a particular 
life stage without substantially changing the protein’s oxygen-
carrying function. Presumably, natural selection acted on these 
altered genes, maintaining them in the population.
In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can compare amino acid 
sequences of the globin family proteins and see how such com-
parisons were used to generate the model for globin gene evo-
lution shown in Figure 20.14. The existence of several pseudo-
genes among the functional globin genes provides additional 
evidence for this model: Random mutations in these “genes” 
over evolutionary time have destroyed their function.
Evolution of Genes with Novel Functions
In the evolution of the globin gene families, gene duplica-
tion and subsequent divergence produced family mem-
bers whose protein products performed similar functions 
Evolutionary time
Duplication of ancestral gene
Ancestral globin gene
Mutation in both copies
Transposition to different 
chromosomes
Further duplications
and mutations
c-Globin gene family
on chromosome 16
d-Globin gene family
on chromosome 11
1 df
cd
e1ec2
ec1
c2c1yw ed
dc
dc1 i
GiAi
. Figure 20.14 A proposed model for the sequence of events in the evolution of the 
human /u1D6C2-globin and /u1D6C3-globin gene families from a single ancestral globin gene.
? The gold elements are pseudogenes. Explain how they could have arisen after gene duplication.
(oxygen transport). Alternatively, 
one copy of a duplicated gene can 
undergo alterations that lead to a com-
pletely new function for the protein 
product. The genes for lysozyme and 
a-lactalbumin are a good example.
Lysozyme is an enzyme that helps 
protect animals against bacterial infec-
tion by hydrolyzing bacterial cell 
walls (see Visualizing Figure 5.16); 
a-lactalbumin is a nonenzymatic pro-
tein that plays a role in milk produc-
tion in mammals. The two proteins 
are quite similar in their amino acid 
sequences and three-dimensional 
structures (Figure 20.15). Both genes 
are found in mammals, but only the 
lysozyme gene is present in birds. 
These findings suggest that at some 
time after the lineages leading to 
mammals and birds had separated, the 
lysozyme gene was duplicated in the mammalian lineage 
but not in the avian lineage. Subsequently, one copy of the 
duplicated lysozyme gene evolved into a gene encoding 
a-lactalbumin, a protein with a completely new function 
associated with a key characteristic of mammals—milk 
production. In one study, evolutionary biologists searched 
vertebrate genomes for genes with similar sequences. There 
appear to be at least eight members of the lysozyme fam-
ily, distributed widely among mammalian species. The 
functions of all the encoded gene products are not yet 
known, but it will be exciting to discover whether they are 
as different as the functions of lysozyme and a-lactalbumin.
Besides the duplication and divergence of whole genes, 
rearrangement of existing DNA sequences within genes has 
also contributed to genome evolution. The presence of introns 
may have promoted the evolution of new proteins by facilitat-
ing the duplication or shuffling of exons, as we’ll see next.
Rearrangements of Parts of Genes:  
Exon Duplication and Exon Shuffling
Recall from Concept 17.3 that an exon often codes for a pro-
tein domain, a distinct structural and functional region of a 
protein molecule, such as the WD40 domain in Figure 20.3. 
We’ve already seen that unequal crossing over during 
meiosis can lead to duplication of a gene on one chromo-
some and its loss from the homologous chromosome (see 
Figure 20.13). By a similar process, a particular exon within 
a gene could be duplicated on one chromosome and deleted 
from the other. The gene with the duplicated exon would 
code for a protein containing a second copy of the encoded 
domain. This change in the protein’s structure might 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   490 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 492 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 491
augment its function by increasing its stability, enhancing 
its ability to bind a particular ligand, or altering some other 
property. Quite a few protein-coding genes have multiple 
copies of related exons, which presumably arose by duplica-
tion and then diverged. The gene encoding the extracellular 
matrix protein collagen is a good example. Collagen is a 
structural protein (see Figure 5.18) with a highly repetitive 
amino acid sequence, which reflects the repetitive pattern 
of exons in the collagen gene.
As an alternative possibility, we can imagine the occa-
sional mixing and matching of different exons either 
within a gene or between two different (nonallelic) genes 
owing to errors in meiotic recombination. This process, 
termed exon shuffling, could lead to new proteins with novel 
combinations of functions. As an example, let’s consider 
the gene for tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). The TPA 
protein is an extracellular protein that helps control blood 
clotting. It has four domains of three types, each encoded 
by an exon, and one of those exons is present in two  
copies. Because each type of exon is also found in other 
proteins, the current version of the gene for TPA is thought 
to have arisen by several instances of exon shuffling 
during errors in meiotic recombination and subsequent 
duplication (Figure 20.16).
MAKE CONNECTIONS Even though 
two amino acids are not identical, they may 
be structurally and chemically similar and 
therefore behave similarly. Using Figure 5.14 
as a reference, examine the nonidentical 
amino acids in positions 1–30 and note cases 
where the amino acids in the two sequences 
are similarly acidic or basic.
(a)Lysozyme (b)5-lactalbumin
(c)Amino acid sequence alignments of lysozyme and 5-lactalbumin
5-lactalbumin
Lysozyme
5-lactalbumin
Lysozyme
5-lactalbumin
Lysozyme
1
1
51
51
101
101
KVFERCELARTLKRLGMDGYRGISLANWMCLAKWESGYNTRATNYNAGDR
KQFTKCELSQLLK––DIDGYGGIALPELICTMFHTSGYDTQAIVENN––E
STDYGIFQINSRYWCNDGKTPGAVNACHLSCSALLQDNIADAVACAKRVV
STEYGLFQISNKLWCKSSQVPQSRNICDISCDKFLDDDITDDIMCAKKIL
RDPQGIRAWVAWRNRCQ–NRDVRQYVQGCGV
D–IKGIDYWLAHKALCT––EKLEQWLCEKL–
. Figure 20.15 Comparison of lysozyme and /u1D6C2-lactalbumin proteins. Computer-generated 
ribbon models of the similar structures of (a) lysozyme and (b) a-lactalbumin are shown, along with 
(c) a comparison of the amino acid sequences of the two proteins. Single-letter amino acid codes 
are used (see Figure 5.14). Identical amino acids are highlighted in yellow, and dashes indicate gaps 
in one sequence that have been introduced by the software to optimize the alignment.
EGF EGF EGF EGF
F
Epidermal growth
factor gene with multiple
EGF exons Exon
duplication
Exon
shuffling
Exon
shuffling
Fibronectin gene with multiple
“finger” exons
Plasminogen gene with a
“kringle” exon
Portions of ancestral genes TPA gene as it exists today
K
FFF
FEGF K K
. Figure 20.16 Evolution of a new gene by exon shuffling. 
Meiotic errors could have moved exons, each encoding a particular 
domain, from ancestral forms of the genes for epidermal growth 
factor, fibronectin, and plasminogen (left) into the evolving gene for 
tissue plasminogen activator, TPA (right). Subsequent duplication 
of the “kringle” exon (K) from the plasminogen gene after its 
movement into the TPA gene could account for the two copies of 
this exon in the TPA gene existing today.
VISUAL SKILLS Looking at Figure 20.13, describe the steps by which 
transposable elements within introns might have facilitated the exon 
shuffling shown here.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   491 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 493 ===

492 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
How Have Amino Acid Sequences of Human Globin Genes 
Diverged During Their Evolution? To build a model of the 
evolutionary history of the globin genes (see Figure 20.14), re-
searchers compared the amino acid sequences of the polypep-
tides they encode. In this exercise, you will analyze comparisons 
of the amino acid sequences of the globin polypeptides to shed 
light on their evolutionary relationships.
How the Experiment Was Done Scientists obtained the DNA 
sequences for each of the eight globin genes and “translated” 
them into amino acid sequences. They then used a computer pro-
gram to align the sequences (with dashes indicating gaps in one 
sequence) and calculate a percent identity value for each pair 
of globins. The percent identity reflects the number of positions 
with identical amino acids relative to the total number of amino 
acids in a globin polypeptide. The data were displayed in a table 
to show the pairwise comparisons.
Data from the Experiment T h e  f o l l o w i n g  t a b l e  s h o w s  a n  e x-
ample of a pairwise alignment—that of the a1-globin (alpha-1 
globin) and z-globin (zeta globin) amino acid sequences—using 
the standard single-letter symbols for amino acids. To the left of 
each line of amino acid sequence is the number of the first amino 
acid in that line. The percent identity value for the a1- and z-globin 
amino acid sequences was calculated by counting the number of 
Reading an Amino Acid Sequence Identity Table
matching amino acids (86, highlighted 
in yellow), dividing by the total number 
of amino acid positions (143), and then 
multiplying by 100. This resulted in a 60% 
identity value for the a1-z pair, as shown 
in the amino acid identity table at the bot-
tom of the page. The values for other glo-
bin pairs were calculated in the same way.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Note that in the amino acid identity table, the data are ar-
ranged so each globin pair can be compared. (a) Some cells 
in the table have dashed lines. Given the pairs that are being 
compared for these cells, what percent identity value is im-
plied by the dashed lines? (b) Notice that the cells in the lower 
left half of the table are blank. Using the information already 
provided in the table, fill in the missing values. Why does it 
make sense that these cells were left blank in the table?
2. The earlier that two genes arose from a duplicated gene, the 
more their nucleotide sequences can have diverged, which may 
result in amino acid differences in the protein products. (a) Based 
on that premise, identify which two genes are most divergent 
from each other. What is the percent amino acid identity be-
tween their polypeptides? (b) Using the same approach, identify 
which two globin genes are the most recently duplicated. What is 
the percent identity between them?
3. The model of globin gene evolution shown in Figure 20.14 sug-
gests that an ancestral gene duplicated and mutated to become 
a- and b-globin genes, and then each one was further duplicated 
and mutated. What features of the data set support the model?
4. Make an ordered list of all the percent identity values from 
the table, starting with 100% at the top. Next to each num-
ber write the globin pair(s) with that percent identity value. 
Use one color for the globins from the a family and a differ-
ent color for the globins from the b family. (a) Compare the 
order of pairs on your list with their positions in the model 
shown in Figure 20.14. Does the order of pairs describe the 
same relative “closeness” of globin family members seen in 
the model? (b) Compare the percent identity values for pairs 
within the a or b family to the values for between-family pairs.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Further Reading R. C. Hardison, Globin genes on the move, Journal of Biology 
7:35.1–35.5 (2008).
Scientific Skills Exercise
c
d
d
c
m Hemoglobin
Globin Alignment of Globin Amino Acid Sequences
MVLSPADKTNVKAAWGKVGAHAGEYGAEAL
MSLTKTERTIIVSMWAKISTQADTIGTETL
1
1
c1
c1
c1
c1
c1
ERMFLSFPTTKTYFPHFDLSH–GSAQVKGH
ERLFLSHPQTKTYFPHFDL–HPGSAQLRAH
GKKVADALTNAVAHVDDMPNALSALSDLHA
GSKVVAAVGDAVKSIDDIGGALSKLSELHA
HKLRVDPVNFKLLSHCLLVTLAAHLPAEFT
YILRVDPVNFKLLSHCLLVTLAARFPADFT
PAVHASLDKFLASVSTVLTSKYR
AEAHAAWDKFLSVVSSVLTEKYR
31
31
61
61
91
91
 121
 121
Amino Acid Identity Table
d Family c Family
c1 42
42
41
73
72
80
99
42
42
41
73
71
80
39
39
41
76
73
44
44
40
93
45
45
38
60
60
100-----
Ai
Gi
d
f
c2
*
d Familyc Family
g
c1
(alpha 1)
c2
(alpha 2)
Ai
(gamma A)
Gi
(gamma G)
d
(beta)
f
(delta)
g
(epsilon)
*
(zeta)
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
Compiled using data from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   492 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 494 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 493
genetic diversity provides valuable raw material for natural 
selection. Diversification of genes and their products is an 
important factor in the evolution of new species. Thus, the 
accumulation of changes in the genome of each species pro-
vides a record of its evolutionary history. To read this record, 
we must be able to identify genomic changes. Comparing the 
genomes of different species allows us to do that, increasing 
our understanding of how genomes evolve. You will learn 
more about these topics next.
How Transposable Elements Contribute  
to Genome Evolution
The persistence of transposable elements as a large fraction 
of some eukaryotic genomes is consistent with the idea 
that they play an important role in shaping a genome over 
evolutionary time. These elements can contribute to the 
evolution of the genome in several ways. They can promote 
recombination, disrupt cellular genes or control elements, 
and carry entire genes or individual exons to new locations.
Transposable elements of similar sequence scattered 
throughout the genome facilitate recombination between 
different (nonhomologous) chromosomes by providing 
homologous regions for crossing over (see Figure 20.13). 
Most such recombination events are probably detrimental, 
causing chromosomal translocations and other changes in 
the genome that may be lethal to the organism. But over the 
course of evolutionary time, an occasional recombination 
event of this sort may be advantageous to the organism. (For 
the change to be heritable, of course, it must happen in a cell 
that will give rise to a gamete.)
The movement of a transposable element can have a vari-
ety of consequences. For instance, a transposable element 
that “jumps” into a protein-coding sequence will prevent the 
production of a normal transcript of the gene. (Introns pro-
vide a sort of “safety zone” that does not affect the transcript 
because the transposable element will be spliced out—unless 
it affects the splicing process.) If a transposable element inserts 
within a regulatory sequence, the transposition may lead to 
increased or decreased production of one or more proteins. 
Transposition caused both types of effects on the genes cod-
ing for pigment-synthesizing enzymes in McClintock’s corn 
kernels. Again, while such changes are usually harmful, in the 
long run some may provide a survival advantage. A possible 
example was mentioned earlier: At least some of the Alu trans-
posable elements in the human genome are known to produce 
RNAs that regulate expression of human genes.
During transposition, a transposable element may carry 
along a gene or even a group of genes to a new position in 
the genome. This occurrence probably accounts for the loca-
tion of the a-globin and b-globin gene families on different 
human chromosomes, as well as the dispersion of the genes 
of certain other gene families. By a similar tag-along process, 
an exon from one gene may be inserted into another gene in 
a mechanism similar to that of exon shuffling during recom-
bination. For example, an exon may be inserted by transposi-
tion into the intron of a protein-coding gene. If the inserted 
exon is retained in the RNA transcript during RNA splic-
ing, the protein that is synthesized will have an additional 
domain, which may confer a new function on the protein.
Most often, the processes discussed in this section produce 
harmful effects, which may be lethal, or have no effect at 
all. In a few cases, however, small heritable changes that are 
beneficial may occur. Over many generations, the resulting 
CONCEPT CHECK 20.5
1. Describe three examples of errors in cellular processes that 
lead to DNA duplications.
2. Explain how multiple exons might have arisen in the ances-
tral EGF and fibronectin genes shown in Figure 20.16 (left).
3. What are three ways that transposable elements are 
thought to contribute to genome evolution?
4. WHAT IF? In 2005, Icelandic scientists reported finding a 
large chromosomal inversion present in 20% of northern 
Europeans, and they noted that Icelandic women with 
this inversion had significantly more children than women 
without it. What would you expect to happen to the fre-
quency of this inversion in the Icelandic population in future 
generations?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 20.6
Comparing genome sequences 
provides clues to evolution and 
development
EVOLUTION In the last 30 years, we have seen rapid 
advances in genome sequencing and data collection, new 
techniques for assessing gene activity across the whole 
genome and for editing a gene sequence in a specific way in 
living cells, and refined approaches for understanding how 
genes and their products work together in complex systems. 
In the field of biology, we are truly poised on the brink of a 
new world.
Comparing genome sequences from different species 
reveals a lot about the evolutionary history of life, from very 
ancient to more recent. Similarly, comparative studies of the 
genetic programs that direct embryonic development in dif-
ferent species are uncovering the mechanisms that generated 
the great diversity of life-forms present today. We’ll now look 
at what has been learned from these two approaches.
Comparing Genomes
The more similar in sequence the genes and genomes of two 
species are, the less time has passed for mutations and other 
changes to accumulate, and therefore the more closely related 
those species are in their evolutionary history. Comparing 
genomes of closely related species sheds light on more recent 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   493 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 495 ===

494 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
yeast genes could be replaced by the corresponding human 
gene. This striking result underscores the common origin of 
yeasts and humans—two distantly related species.
Comparing Closely Related Species
The genomes of two closely related species are likely to be 
organized similarly because of their relatively recent diver-
gence. Their long shared history also means that only a small 
number of gene differences are found when their genomes 
are compared. These genetic differences can thus be more 
easily correlated with phenotypic differences between the 
two species. An exciting application of this type of analysis 
is seen as researchers compare the human genome with the 
genomes of the chimpanzee, mouse, rat, and other mammals. 
Identifying the genes shared by all of these species but not 
by nonmammals gives us clues about what it takes to make a 
mammal, while finding the genes shared by chimpanzees and 
humans but not by rodents tells us something about primates. 
And, of course, comparing the human genome with that of 
the chimpanzee helps us answer a tantalizing question: What 
genomic information defines a human or a chimpanzee?
An analysis of the overall composition of the human and 
chimpanzee genomes, which are thought to have diverged only 
about 6 million years ago (see Figure 20.17), reveals some gen-
eral differences. Considering single nucleotide substitutions, 
the two genomes differ by only 1.2%. When researchers looked 
at longer stretches of DNA, however, they were surprised to 
find a further 2.7% difference due to insertions or deletions of 
larger regions in the genome of one or the other species; many 
of the insertions were duplications or other repetitive DNA. In 
fact, a third of the human duplications are not present in the 
chimpanzee genome, and some of these duplications contain 
regions associated with human diseases. More Alu elements 
have undergone transposition in the human genome, lead-
ing to 7,000 human-specific elements compared with 2,300 
chimpanzee-specific elements. The chimpanzee genome, in 
turn, contains many copies of a retroviral provirus not present 
in humans. All of these observations provide clues to the forces 
that might have swept the two genomes along different paths, 
but we don’t have a complete picture yet.
Along with chimpanzees, bonobos are the other African 
ape species that are the closest living relatives to humans. 
The sequencing of the bonobo genome revealed that in some 
regions, human sequences were more closely related to either 
chimpanzee or bonobo sequences than chimpanzee or bonobo 
sequences were to each other. Such a fine-grained comparison 
of three closely related species allows even more detail to be 
worked out in reconstructing their related evolutionary history.
We also don’t know how the genetic differences revealed 
by genome sequencing might account for the distinct 
characteristics of each species. To discover the basis for the 
phenotypic differences between chimpanzees and humans, 
biologists are studying specific genes and types of genes that 
differ between the two species and comparing them with their 
evolutionary events, whereas comparing genomes of very 
distantly related species helps us understand ancient evolu-
tionary history. In either case, learning about characteristics 
that are shared or divergent between groups enhances our 
picture of the evolution of organisms and biological processes. 
Evolutionary relationships between species can be represented 
by a diagram in the form of a tree (often turned sideways), 
where each branch point marks the divergence of two lineages 
(see Figure 1.20). Figure 20.17 shows the evolutionary relation-
ships of some groups and species we’ll now examine.
Comparing Distantly Related Species
Determining which genes have remained similar—that is, are 
highly conserved—in distantly related species can help clarify 
evolutionary relationships among species that diverged from 
each other long ago. Indeed, comparisons of the specific gene 
sequences of bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes indicate that 
these three groups diverged between 2 and 4 billion years ago 
and strongly support the theory that they are the fundamen-
tal domains of life (see Figure 20.17).
In addition to their value in evolutionary biology, compar-
ative genomic studies confirm the relevance of research on 
model organisms to our understanding of biology in general 
and human biology in particular. Very ancient genes can still 
be surprisingly similar in disparate species. One experimental 
study tested the ability of the human version of each of 414 
important yeast genes to function equivalently in yeast cells. 
Remarkably, the researchers concluded that 47% of these 
12
Billions of years ago
34 0
Bacteria
Eukarya
Archaea
Most recent
common
ancestor
of all living
things
Millions of years ago
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Chimpanzee
Human
Mouse
. Figure 20.17 Evolutionary relationships of the three 
domains of life. The tree diagram at the top shows the ancient 
divergence of bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. A portion of the 
eukaryote lineage is expanded in the inset to show the more recent 
divergence of three mammalian species discussed in this chapter.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   494 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 496 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 495
counterparts in other mammals. This approach has revealed 
a number of genes that are apparently changing (evolving) 
faster in the human than in either the chimpanzee or the 
mouse. Among them are genes involved in defense against 
malaria and tuberculosis as well as at least one gene that regu-
lates brain size. When genes are classified by function, the 
genes that seem to be evolving the fastest are those that code 
for transcription factors. This discovery makes sense because 
transcription factors regulate gene expression and thus play a 
key role in orchestrating the overall genetic program.
One transcription factor of interest, whose gene is called 
FOXP2, might be involved with the acquisition of speech 
in humans. Attention was first drawn to FOXP2 in 2002 
when a research publication reported that this gene was 
evolving faster in humans (Homo sapiens) than in other 
primates, based in part on two amino acids found only in 
the human protein sequence. The researchers proposed that 
this was a human-specific version of the gene that resulted 
from strong natural selection and might have conferred on 
humans the ability to speak.
In 2014, a high-quality sequence of the Neanderthal 
(Homo neanderthalensis) genome was achieved from a small 
amount of preserved genomic DNA, and shortly thereaf-
ter the DNA of another member of the species Homo, the 
Denisovan, was sequenced as well (see Concept 34.7). It turns 
out that some DNA sequences from both species encode 
the same two amino acids, so the two amino acids are not 
human-specific. In a paper published in 2018, researchers 
analyzed genomic sequences from a larger and more diverse 
population of modern humans. In this more robust study, the 
researchers found no evidence for strong natural selection for 
those two amino acids in the human lineage during the time 
frame relevant to language acquisition.
However, the FOXP2 gene is still interesting in its own right. 
Several lines of evidence suggest that the FOXP2 gene product 
regulates genes that function in vocalization in vertebrates. 
First, mutations in this gene can produce severe speech and 
language impairment in humans. Second, the FOXP2 gene 
is expressed in the brains of zebra finches and canaries at the 
time when these songbirds are learning their songs. And third, 
perhaps the strongest evidence comes from a “knockout” 
experiment in which researchers disrupted the FOXP2 gene in 
mice and analyzed the resulting phenotype (Figure 20.18). The 
homozygous mutant mice had malformed brains and failed 
to emit normal ultrasonic vocalizations; mice with one faulty 
copy of the gene also showed significant problems with vocal-
ization. These results support the idea that the FOXP2 gene 
product turns on genes involved in vocalization.
Expanding on this analysis, another research group 
replaced the FOXP2 gene in mice with a “humanized” copy 
coding for the human versions of the FOXP2 protein, with 
the two amino acids that differ between human and chim-
panzee sequences. The researchers reported that although the 
mice with the human FOXP2 gene were generally healthy, 
they had subtly different vocalizations and showed changes 
in brain cells in circuits associated with speech in human 
brains. While the FOXP2 gene clearly affects vocalization and 
speech, the precise mechanism by which it does this is still to 
be determined.
The FOXP2 story is an excellent example of how different 
approaches can complement each other in uncovering biologi-
cal phenomena of widespread importance. The FOXP2 experi-
ments used mice as a model for humans because it would be 
unethical (as well as impractical) to carry out such experiments 
in humans. Mice and humans, which diverged about 65.5 
million years ago (see Figure 20.17), share about 85% of their 
genes. This genetic similarity can be exploited in studying 
human genetic disorders. If researchers know the organ or tis-
sue that is affected by a particular genetic disorder, they can 
look for genes that are expressed in these locations in mice.
Even though more distantly related to humans, fruit 
flies have also been a useful model species for study of such 
human disorders as Parkinson’s disease and alcoholism, while 
nematodes (soil worms) have yielded a wealth of information 
about aging. Further research efforts are under way to extend 
genomic studies to many more species, including neglected 
species from diverse branches of the tree of life. These studies 
will advance our understanding of evolution, of course, as 
well as all aspects of biology, from human health to ecology.
Comparing Genomes Within a Species
Another exciting consequence of our ability to analyze 
genomes is our growing understanding of the spectrum 
of genetic variation in humans. Because the history of the 
human species is so short—probably about 200,000 years—
the amount of DNA variation among humans is small com-
pared to that of many other species. Much of our diversity 
seems to be in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs). SNPs are single base-pair sites where genetic variation 
is found in at least 1% of the population (see Concept 19.2); 
they are usually detected by DNA sequencing. In the human 
genome, SNPs occur on average about once in 100–300 base 
pairs. Scientists have already identified the locations of sev-
eral million SNP sites in the human genome and continue to 
find additional SNPs. These are stored in databases around 
the world, one of which is run by the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and can be accessed at 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/.
In the course of this search, they have also found other 
variations—including chromosomal regions with inversions, 
deletions, and duplications. The most surprising discovery 
has been the widespread occurrence of copy-number variants 
(CNVs), loci where some individuals have one or multiple 
copies of a particular gene or genetic region rather than the 
standard two copies (one on each homolog). CNVs result 
from regions of the genome being duplicated or deleted 
inconsistently within the population. One study of 40 people 
found more than 8,000 CNVs involving 13% of the genes in 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   495 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 497 ===

496 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Conclusion FOXP2 plays a significant role in the development 
of functional communication systems in mice. The results aug-
ment evidence from studies of birds and humans, supporting the 
hypothesis that FOXP2 may act similarly in diverse organisms.
Data from W. Shu et al., Altered ultrasonic vocalization in mice with a disruption  
in the Foxp2 gene, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA  
102:9643–9648 (2005).
. Figure 20.18 Inquiry
What is the function of a gene (FOXP2) that may be involved in language acquisition?
Experiment S e v e r a l  l i n e s  o f  e v i d e n c e  s u p p o r t  a  r o l e  f o r  t h e  FOXP2 gene in the 
development of speech and language in humans and of vocalization in other ver-
tebrates. In 2005, Joseph Buxbaum and collaborators at the Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine and several other institutions tested the function of FOXP2. They used the 
mouse, a model organism in which genes can be easily knocked out, as a represen-
tative vertebrate that vocalizes: Mice produce ultrasonic squeaks (whistles) to com-
municate stress. The researchers used genetic engineering to produce mice in which 
one or both copies of FOXP2 were disrupted.
Wild type: two 
normal copies of 
FOXP2
Heterozygote: one 
copy of FOXP2 
disrupted
Homozygote: both 
copies of FOXP2 
disrupted
They then compared the phenotypes of these mice. Two of the characters they 
examined are included here: brain anatomy and vocalization.
Experiment 1: R e s e a r c h e r s  c u t  t h i n  s e c t i o n s  o f  b r a i n  a n d  s t a i n e d  t h e m  w i t h  r e-
agents that allow visualization of brain anatomy in a UV fluorescence microscope.
Experiment 2: T o  i n d u c e  s t r e s s ,  r e-
searchers separated each newborn mouse 
pup from its mother and recorded the 
number of ultrasonic whistles produced 
by the pup.Results
Wild type Heterozygote Homozygote 0
400
300
200
100
Wild
type
Number of whistles
Hetero-
zygote
Homo-
zygote
(No
whistles)
Experiment 1 Results: Disruption of both copies of FOXP2 led to brain abnormalities 
in which the cells were disorganized. Phenotypic effects on the brain of heterozygotes, 
with one disrupted copy, were less severe. (Each color in the micrographs below 
reveals a different cell or tissue type.)
Experiment 2 Results: Disruption of 
both copies of FOXP2 led to an absence 
of ultrasonic vocalization in response to 
stress. The effect on vocalization in the 
heterozygote was also extreme.
WHAT IF? Since the results support a role for mouse FOXP2 in 
vocalization, you might wonder whether the human FOXP2 protein 
is a key regulator of speech. If you were given the amino acid 
sequences of wild-type and mutant human FOXP2 proteins and the 
wild-type chimpanzee FOXP2 protein, how would you investigate 
this question? What further clues could you obtain by comparing 
these sequences to that of the mouse FOXP2 protein?
the genome, and these CNVs probably represent just a small 
subset of the total. Since these variants encompass much 
longer stretches of DNA than the single nucleotides of SNPs, 
CNVs are more likely to have phenotypic consequences and 
to play a role in complex diseases and disorders. At the very 
least, the high incidence of copy-number variation blurs the 
meaning of the phrase “a normal human genome.”
Copy-number variants, SNPs, and variations in repetitive 
DNA such as short tandem repeats (STRs) are useful genetic 
markers for studying human evolution. In one study, the 
genomes of two Africans from different communities were 
sequenced: Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the South African 
civil rights advocate of Xhosa and Tswana tribal heritage and 
a speaker of a Bantu language, and !Gubi, a hunter-gatherer 
from a Khoisan language-speaking community in the 
Kalahari Desert of Namibia. This community is believed to be 
the human group with the oldest known lineage. The com-
parison revealed many differences, as you might expect. The 
analysis was then broadened to compare the protein-coding 
regions of !Gubi’s genome with those of three other Khoisan-
speaking men also living in the Kalahari. Remarkably, the 
four genomes of these men living in the same area differed 
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   496 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 498 ===

 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 497
more from each other than a European would from an Asian. 
These data highlight the extensive diversity among African 
genomes, consistent with our understanding that humans 
and their ancestors arose in Africa and that native Africans 
have therefore been evolving for longer than any migrant 
(non-African) population. Extending this approach will help 
answer questions about the differences between human 
populations and the migratory routes of human populations 
throughout history.
Widespread Conservation of 
Developmental Genes Among Animals
Biologists in the field of evolutionary developmental biology, 
or evo-devo, as it is often called, compare developmental 
processes of different multicellular organisms. Their aim is 
to understand how these processes have evolved and how 
changes in them can modify existing organismal features or 
lead to new ones. With the advent of molecular techniques 
and the recent flood of genomic information, we are begin-
ning to realize that the genomes of related species with strik-
ingly different forms may have only minor differences in 
gene sequence or, perhaps more importantly, in gene regula-
tion. Discovering the molecular basis of these differences in 
turn helps us understand the origins of the myriad diverse 
forms that cohabit this planet, thus informing our study of 
the evolution of life.
In Concept 18.4, you learned about the homeotic genes 
in Drosophila melanogaster, which encode transcription 
factors that regulate gene expression and specify the iden-
tity of body segments in the fruit fly (see Figure 18.20). 
Molecular analysis of the homeotic genes in Drosophila 
has shown that they all include a 180-nucleotide sequence 
called a homeobox, which codes for a 60-amino-acid 
homeodomain in the encoded proteins. An identical or very 
similar nucleotide sequence has been discovered in the 
homeotic genes of many invertebrates and vertebrates. 
The resemblance even extends to the organization of these 
genes: The vertebrate genes homologous to the homeo-
tic genes of fruit flies have kept the same chromosomal 
arrangement (Figure 20.19). The similarities in sequence 
and organization are so striking that one researcher has 
whimsically referred to flies as “little people with wings.” 
Homeobox-containing sequences have also been found in 
regulatory genes of much more distantly related eukaryotes, 
including plants and yeasts. From these similarities, we can 
deduce that the homeobox DNA sequence evolved very 
early and was sufficiently valuable to organisms to have 
been conserved in animals and plants virtually unchanged 
for hundreds of millions of years.
Homeotic genes in animals were named Hox genes, short 
for homeobox-containing genes, because homeotic genes 
were the first genes found to have this sequence. Other 
Adult
fruit fly
Fruit fly embryo
(10 hours)
Mouse embryo
(12 days)
Mouse 
chromosomes
Fruit fly
chromosome
Adult mouse
. Figure 20.19 Conservation of homeotic genes in a fruit fly 
and a mouse. Homeotic genes that control the form of anterior and 
posterior structures of the body occur in the same linear sequence 
on chromosomes in Drosophila and mice. Each colored band on the 
chromosomes shown here represents a homeotic gene. In fruit flies, all 
homeotic genes are found on one chromosome. The mouse and other 
mammals have the same or similar sets of genes on four chromosomes. 
The color code indicates the parts of the embryos in which these genes 
are expressed and the adult body regions that result. All of these genes 
are essentially identical in flies and mice, except for those represented 
by black bands, which are less similar in the two animals.
homeobox-containing genes were later found that do not 
act as homeotic genes; that is, they do not directly control 
the identity of body parts. However, most of these genes, in 
animals at least, are associated with development, suggest-
ing their ancient and fundamental importance in that pro-
cess. In Drosophila, for example, homeoboxes are present 
not only in the homeotic genes but also in the egg-polarity 
gene bicoid (see Figures 18.21 and 18.22), in several of the 
segmentation genes, and in a master regulatory gene for 
eye development.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   497 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 499 ===

498 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
Researchers have discovered that the homeobox-encoded 
homeodomain is the part of the protein that binds to DNA 
when the protein functions as a transcription factor. Elsewhere 
in the protein, domains that are more variable interact with 
other transcription factors, allowing the homeodomain-
containing protein to recognize specific enhancers and regulate 
the associated genes. Proteins with homeodomains probably 
regulate development by coordinating the transcription of 
batteries of developmental genes, switching them on or off. In 
embryos of Drosophila and other animal species, different com-
binations of homeobox genes are active in different parts of the 
embryo. This selective expression of regulatory genes, varying 
over time and space, is central to pattern formation.
Developmental biologists have found that in addition 
to homeotic genes, many other genes involved in develop-
ment are highly conserved from species to species. These 
include numerous genes encoding components of signal-
ing pathways. The extraordinary similarity among some 
developmental genes in different animal species raises a 
question: How can the same genes be involved in the devel-
opment of animals whose forms are so very different from 
each other?
In some cases, small changes in regulatory sequences of 
particular genes cause changes in gene expression patterns 
that can lead to major changes in body form. For example, 
the differing patterns of expression of the Hox genes along the 
body axis in a crustacean and an insect can explain the varia-
tion in number of leg-bearing segments among these closely 
related animals (Figure 20.20). In other cases, similar genes 
direct different developmental processes in various organ-
isms, resulting in diverse body shapes. Several Hox genes, for 
instance, are expressed in the embryonic and larval stages of 
the sea urchin, a nonsegmented animal that has a body plan 
quite different from those of insects and mice. Sea urchin 
adults make the pincushion-shaped shells you may have seen 
on the beach; two species of live sea urchins are shown in the 
photo. Sea urchins are among the organisms long used in clas-
sical embryological studies (see Concept 46.2).
Swimmerets
(a)Expression of four Hox genes in the brine shrimp Artemia. 
Three of the Hox genes are expressed together in one region 
(indicated by stripes), specifying the identity of the segments 
that have swimmerets. The fourth (teal) specifies the identity of 
the genital segments.
(b)Expression of the grasshopper versions of the same four
Hox genes. In the grasshopper, each Hox gene is expressed in a 
discrete region and specifies the identity of that region.
. Figure 20.20 Effect of differences in Hox gene expression 
in a crustacean and an insect. Changes in the expression patterns 
of Hox genes have occurred over evolutionary time since insects 
diverged from a crustacean ancestor. These changes account in 
part for the different body plans of (a) the brine shrimp Artemia, 
a crustacean, and (b) the grasshopper, an insect. Shown here are 
regions of the adult body color-coded for expression of four Hox 
genes that determine the formation of particular body parts during 
embryonic development. Each color represents a specific Hox gene.
. Two species of sea urchins
In this chapter of the genetics unit, you have learned how 
studying genomic composition and comparing the genomes 
of different species can illuminate the process by which 
genomes evolve. Furthermore, comparing developmental 
programs, we can see that the unity of life is reflected in the 
similarity of molecular and cellular mechanisms used to 
establish body pattern, although the genes directing develop-
ment may differ among organisms. The similarities between 
genomes reflect the common ancestry of life on Earth. But 
the differences are also crucial, for they have created the huge 
diversity of organisms that have evolved. In the remaining 
chapters, we expand our perspective beyond the level of 
molecules, cells, and genes to explore this diversity on the 
organismal level.
CONCEPT CHECK 20.6
1. Would you expect the genome of the macaque (a monkey) 
to be more like that of a mouse or that of a human? Explain.
2. DNA sequences called homeoboxes help homeotic genes in 
animals direct development. Given that they are common to 
flies and mice, explain why these animals are so different.
3. WHAT IF? There are three times as many human-specific 
insertions of Alu elements in the human genome as in the 
chimpanzee genome. How did these extra Alu elements 
arise in the human genome? Propose a role they might have 
played in the divergence of these two species.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   498 14/03/20   3:29 AM

=== SIDE 500 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
Multicellular eukaryotes have a lot of noncoding DNA 
and many multigene families (pp. 484–487)
• Only 1.5% of the human genome codes for proteins or gives 
rise to rRNAs or tRNAs; the rest is noncoding DNA, including 
pseudogenes and repetitive DNA of unknown function.
• The most abundant type of repetitive DNA in multicellular 
eukaryotes consists of transposable elements and related 
sequences. In eukaryotes, there are two types of transposable ele-
ments: transposons, which move via a DNA intermediate, and 
retrotransposons, which are more prevalent and move via an 
RNA intermediate.
• Other repetitive DNA includes short, noncoding sequences that 
are tandemly repeated thousands of times (simple sequence 
DNA, which includes STRs); these sequences are especially 
prominent in centromeres and telomeres, where they probably 
play structural roles in the chromosome.
• Though many eukaryotic genes are present in one copy per hap-
loid chromosome set, others (most, in some species) are members 
of a gene family, such as the human globin gene families:
c-Globin gene family d-Globin gene family
* dfe*ec2
ec1
c2c1ew ed
Chromosome 16 Chromosome 11
GiAi
? Explain how the function of transposable elements might account for 
their prevalence in human noncoding DNA.
CONCEPT 20.1
The Human Genome Project fostered development  
of faster, less expensive sequencing techniques  
(pp. 477–478)
• The Human Genome Project was largely completed in 2003, 
aided by major advances in sequencing technology.
• In the whole-genome shotgun approach, the whole genome is 
cut into many small, overlapping fragments that are sequenced; 
computer software then assembles the genome sequence.
? How did the Human Genome Project result in more rapid, less 
expensive DNA-sequencing technology?
CONCEPT 20.2
Scientists use bioinformatics to analyze genomes  
and their functions (pp. 478–482)
• Computer analysis of genome sequences aids gene annotation, 
the identification of protein-coding sequences. Methods to de-
termine gene function include comparing sequences of newly 
discovered genes with those of known genes in other species and 
observing the effects of experimentally inactivating the genes.
• In systems biology, scientists use the computer-based tools of 
bioinformatics to compare genomes and study sets of genes and 
proteins as whole systems (genomics and proteomics). Studies 
include large-scale analyses of protein interactions, functional 
DNA elements, and genes contributing to medical conditions.
? What has been the most significant finding of the ENCODE project? 
Why was the project expanded to include nonhuman species?
CONCEPT 20.3
Genomes vary in size, number of genes, and gene 
density (pp. 482–484)
Genome
size Most are 1–6 Mb
1,500–7,500
Higher than in eukaryotes
Most are 10–4,000 Mb, but a
few are much larger
Most are 5,000–45,000
Lower than in prokaryotes
(Within eukaryotes, lower
density is correlated with larger
genomes.)
Present in most genes of
multicellular eukaryotes, but
only in some genes of
unicellular eukaryotes
None in
protein-coding
genes
Present in
some genes
Can exist in large amounts;
generally more repetitive
noncoding DNA in
multicellular eukaryotes
Very little
Bacteria Archaea Eukarya
Number of
genes
Gene
density
Other
noncoding
DNA
Introns
? Compare genome size, gene number, and gene density (a) in the 
three domains and (b) among eukaryotes.
CONCEPT 20.4
CONCEPT 20.5
Duplication, rearrangement, and mutation of DNA 
contribute to genome evolution (pp. 488–493)
• Errors in cell division can lead to extra copies of all or part of 
entire chromosome sets, which may then diverge if one set accu-
mulates sequence changes. Polyploidy occurs more often among 
plants than animals and contributes to speciation.
• The chromosomal organization of genomes can be compared 
among species, providing information about evolutionary rela-
tionships. Within a given species, rearrangements of chromo-
somes are thought to contribute to the emergence of new species.
• The genes encoding the various related but different globin pro-
teins evolved from one common ancestral globin gene, which 
duplicated and diverged into the a-globin and b-globin ancestral 
genes. Subsequent duplication and random mutation gave rise 
to the present globin genes, all of which code for oxygen-binding 
proteins. The copies of some duplicated genes have diverged 
so much that the functions of their encoded proteins (such as 
lysozyme and a-lactalbumin) are now substantially different.
• Rearrangement of exons within and between genes during evolu-
tion has led to genes containing multiple copies of similar exons 
and/or several different exons derived from other genes.
• Movement of transposable elements or recombination between 
copies of the same element can generate new sequence combi-
nations that are beneficial to the organism. These may alter the 
functions of genes or their patterns of expression and regulation.
? How could chromosomal rearrangements lead to the emergence  
of new species?
20 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
 CHAPTER 20  The Evolution of Genomes 499
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   499 14/03/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 501 ===

Comparing genome sequences provides clues to 
evolution and development (pp. 493–498)
• Comparisons of genomes from widely divergent and closely 
related species provide valuable information about ancient and 
more recent evolutionary history, respectively. Analysis of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy-number variants 
(CNVs) among individuals in a species can also shed light on the 
evolution of that species.
• Evolutionary developmental (evo-devo) biologists have shown 
that homeotic genes and some other genes associated with ani-
mal development contain a homeobox region whose sequence 
is highly conserved among diverse species. 
? What type of information can be obtained by comparing the 
genomes of closely related species? Of very distantly related species?
CONCEPT 20.6
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
4. DRAW IT Below are the amino acid sequences (using single 
letters; see Figure 5.14) of three short segments of the FOXP2 
protein from five species. These segments contain all amino 
acid differences between the FOXP2 proteins of these species. 
Compare the amino acid sequences by answering parts (a)–(d).
Chimpanzee
Mouse
Gorilla
Human
Rhesus monkey
PKSSD
PKSSE
PKSSD
PKSSD
PKSSD
TSSTT
TSSTT
TSSTT
TSSNT
TSSTT
…
…
…
…
…
NARRD
NARRD
NARRD
SARRD
NARRD
…
…
…
…
…
(a) Circle the names of any species that have identical amino 
acid sequences for the FOXP2 protein.
(b) In the sequence for the mouse, circle any amino acid that 
differs from the sequence for the chimpanzee, gorilla, and 
rhesus monkey. Then draw a box around any amino acid 
that differs from the human sequence.
(c) In the human sequence, underline any amino acid that 
differs from the sequence for the chimpanzee, gorilla, and 
rhesus monkey.
(d) Primates and rodents diverged about 65 million years ago, 
and chimpanzees and humans diverged about 6 million years 
ago (see Figure 20.17). How many amino acid differences are 
there between the sequence for the mouse and the sequence 
for the chimpanzee, gorilla, and rhesus monkey? How many 
amino acid differences are there between the human se-
quence and the sequence for the chimpanzee, gorilla, and 
rhesus monkey? Based solely on the numbers of amino acid 
differences occurring over these time periods, what might 
you hypothesize about the rate of evolution of the FOXP2 
500 UNIT THREE  The Genetic Basis of Life
gene? Based on the information in the chapter regarding the 
FOXP2 gene, is your hypothesis correct?
5. EVOLUTION CONNECTION The transcription factor FOXP2 
has been found to be important for vocalization in humans. 
How would a comparison of the sequences of this protein 
across primates help us understand the evolution of speech?
6. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY The scientists mapping the SNPs in 
the human genome noticed that groups of SNPs tended to be 
inherited together, in blocks known as haplotypes, ranging 
in length from 5,000 to 200,000 base pairs. There are as few 
as four or five commonly occurring combinations of SNPs 
per haplotype. Integrating what you’ve learned throughout 
this chapter and this unit, propose an explanation for this 
observation.
7. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION The continuity of 
life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA. In a 
short essay (100–150 words), explain how mutations in protein-
coding genes and regulatory DNA contribute to evolution.
8. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Insects have three thoracic (trunk) segments. While researchers 
have found insect fossils with wings on all segments, modern 
insects have wings or related structures on only the second and 
third segment. In modern insects, Hox gene products act to 
inhibit wing formation on the first segment. The treehopper 
insect (above) is an exception. In addition to the pair of 
prominent wings on its second segment, its first segment 
has an ornate helmet resembling a set of thorns, which is a 
modified, fused pair of “wings.” (This provides camouflage in 
tree branches, reducing the risk of predation.) Explain how 
changes in gene regulation could have led to the evolution of 
such a structure.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How do transposable elements drive evolution?
Go to “Jumping Genes!” at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–3 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C20_PRF.indd   500 14/03/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 502 ===

501
EVOLUTIONUnit 4 
How did you first become interested 
in science?
Although my first love was music, and mu-
sic remains an essential part of my life, to-
ward the end of high school I also became 
quite interested in biology. My conversa-
tions with a friend who was fascinated by 
human behavior led me to wonder how 
the brain causes people to exhibit differ-
ent behaviors. But how could I learn about 
that? My parents did not go to college. I 
didn’t even know that there were careers 
in science that were not in medicine. I 
thought the only way to learn about the 
brain was to be a doctor. So I entered uni-
versity as a pre-med. But by the time I was 
finishing my undergraduate studies, I had 
learned about research labs. I got a sum-
mer internship in a developmental genet-
ics lab, and I loved it—it was like entering 
a new world where I could figure out the 
answers to questions that interested me.
What are the main questions you are 
asking in your research?
I’m interested in understanding the genes 
that control embryonic development 
and how the function of those genes has 
changed in different organisms due to 
evolution. Take a human, for example. Our 
bodies have many different types of cells. 
The instructions for everything that each 
of our cells needs to do are contained in 
the cell’s DNA. All of our cells have exactly 
same DNA. What’s mysterious is, since 
every cell in the body has the same set of 
instructions, why aren’t they all doing the 
same thing? I work mostly with insects, 
but the same question applies to them 
(and to all multicellular organisms). We’re 
trying to figure out how the same set of 
genes is used in different ways by differ-
ent cells. We’re also interested in where 
these genes came from in the first place 
and how they have evolved over time.
Much of your research has been on 
“evo-devo.” Say more about what 
that means.
Evo-devo stands for evolutionary devel-
opmental biology. Scientists in this field 
try to understand the 
difference in devel-
opment between, 
let’s say, a coconut 
and a rose. They’re 
both plants, they 
both make seeds, 
they both make 
pollen, but they 
don’t look the same at 
all. Why is that? Or the 
fact that, when you compare the devel-
opment of a monkey and a human, you 
can’t detect many differences in their 
embryos or their genes. How can they be 
similar in so many ways and yet end up 
as such different organisms? In my lab, 
we are particularly interested in egg and 
sperm cells—known as germ cells. We’re 
trying to figure out how an embryo de-
termines which cells become germ cells 
and how it tells those cells, “Okay, listen: 
When the animal you are part of becomes 
an adult, you will need to make eggs and 
sperm.” We’ve found that in some cases, 
the same genes are used by a variety of 
different species to make germ cells. But 
in other cases, we’ve been surprised to 
find that a gene used to produce germ 
cells in one organism is used to make a 
completely different type of cell in an-
other closely related organism.
What do you find most rewarding 
about your job?
When I was in high school, I never would 
have thought that I could get paid to 
think of interesting questions and then 
try to answer them. I love doing that, and 
I love the amazing freedom that comes 
with my job—I get to decide what I’m 
going to do each day. But the best part is 
working with students as they gain the in-
dependence, knowledge, and confidence 
to listen to my suggestions and then say, 
“I’m not sure that’s the best 
experiment. Here’s an exper-
iment that I think would 
be better, and here’s 
why.” That is a great 
moment. What they are 
really saying is, “I’m not 
learning to be a scientist 
anymore—I am a scientist.” 
They’ve come to understand 
what scientists do: We make 
the best proposal we can, we test it as best 
we can, and we say, “This is what I think 
the results from my experiments mean.”
Cassandra Extavour is Professor in the Department 
of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology at Harvard 
University, where she and her students are studying 
genes that control early embryonic development, as 
well as the evolutionary origins of these genes and 
how their functions have changed over time. Born 
in Toronto, Canada, Dr. Extavour received a B.Sc. 
(honors) in Molecular Biology and Genetics from 
the University of Toronto, followed by a Ph.D. in 
the same subject area from Universidad Autónoma 
de Madrid, Spain. After completing two postdoc-
toral fellowships (one in Greece, the other in the 
United Kingdom), she worked for several years as 
a Research Associate at Cambridge University, UK, 
before joining the faculty at Harvard. Dr. Extavour is 
a dedicated advocate for women and underrepre-
sented groups in science, and she also has performed 
worldwide as a professional soprano.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Cassandra Extavour
“What’s mysterious 
is, since every cell in 
the body has the same 
set of instructions, why 
aren’t they all doing 
the same thing?”
m Embryo of the crustacean Parhyale 
hawaiensis showing cells (in red) that 
will develop into germ cells
URRY1637_12_GE_U04_PRF.indd   501 3/14/20   3:41 AM

=== SIDE 503 ===

Figure 21.1 This Malaysian orchid mantis (Hymenopus coronatus) closely resembles 
the flower on which it rests, waiting for unwary prey to come within its reach. 
Other mantises have diverse shapes and colors that have evolved in different 
environments—yet all mantises also share certain features, such as grasping 
forelimbs, large eyes, and six legs.
How Evolution Works2121.1 The Darwinian revolution 
challenged traditional views 
of a young Earth inhabited by 
unchanging species p. 503
21.2 Descent with modification by 
natural selection explains the 
adaptations of organisms and the 
unity and diversity of life p. 505
21.3 Evolution is supported by an 
overwhelming amount of scientific 
evidence p. 510 
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 21
• Figure 21.17 Walkthrough: Tree Thinking
• Figure 21.20 Walkthrough: Transition to 
Life in the Sea
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• HHMI Video: The Making of the Fittest: 
Natural Selection and Adaptation 
(Pocket Mouse)
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Make a word cloud: This chapter covers 
key topics related to evolution, such as 
descent with modification, heritable 
characteristics, natural selection, adaptation, 
convergent evolution, homology, and 
unity of life. Draw a “word cloud” of these 
terms: As you read the chapter, draw a line 
between terms that affect or relate to one 
another. Next to that line, briefly explain 
how those terms are connected.
Term or
concept
Term or
concept
Term or
conceptTerm or
concept
explain
relationship
explain
relationship
explain
relationship
What causes the similarities and differences among 
Earth’s many different species?
Species accumulate differences from their ancestors
as they adapt to different environments over many generations.
While different in some ways, these species share many similar features      
   because they descended from a common ancestor. This process of
descent with modification
Ancient common ancestor
shared ancestry,
resulting in shared 
characteristics
accumulation 
of differences
has given rise to the diversity of life.
502
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   502 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 504 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 503
The Darwinian revolution 
challenged traditional views  
of a young Earth inhabited  
by unchanging species
More than a century and a half ago, Charles Darwin was 
inspired to develop a scientific explanation for the diversity 
of life, the great number and remarkable variety of species 
on Earth. When he published his hypothesis in his book The 
Origin of Species, Darwin ushered in a scientific revolution—
the era of evolutionary biology. As we’ll see, Darwin devel-
oped his revolutionary ideas over time, influenced by the 
work of others and his travels (Figure 21.2).
Endless Forms Most Beautiful
To set the stage for our study of Darwin and evolutionary 
biology, let’s return to the well-hidden orchid mantis in  
Figure 21.1. This species is a member of a diverse group of 
CONCEPT 21.1 insects, the Mantodea, which includes 2,300 species in 430 
genera. All these mantises share certain features, such as 
three pairs of legs, triangular heads with bulging eyes, and a 
flexible “neck.” Such shared features illustrate the unity of 
life, a phrase that highlights the fact that all organisms share 
characteristics.
But Earth’s many different species also differ from one 
another. The mantises, for example, differ in features such as 
their size, shape, and color. Overall, the orchid mantis and its 
many close relatives illustrate three key observations about life:
• organisms are well suited (adapted) for life in their en-
vironments (Here and throughout this text, the term 
environment refers to other organisms as well as to the 
physical aspects of an organism’s surroundings.)
• the many shared characteristics (unity) of life
• the rich diversity of life
Darwin, a keen observer of nature since childhood, set 
out to explain these three broad observations—an effort that 
eventually led him to conclude that life evolves over time.
For now, we will define evolution as descent with 
modification, a phrase Darwin used to summarize the process 
1809
Lamarck publishes his 
hypothesis of evolution.
1798
Malthus publishes 
”Essay on the 
Principle of 
Population.”
1812
Cuvier publishes his 
extensive studies of 
vertebrate fossils. 1830
Lyell publishes 
Principles of Geology.
1858
While studying species in the Malay 
Archipelago, Wallace (shown above in 
1848) sends Darwin his hypothesis of 
natural selection.
1859
The Origin of Species is 
published.1844
Darwin writes his 
essay on descent 
with modification.
1795
Hutton
proposes his
principle of 
gradualism.
1809
Charles Darwin 
is born.
1831–1836
Darwin travels 
around the world 
on HMS Beagle.
1790 1870
Darwin saw 
marine iguanas 
in the Galápagos 
Islands.
Sketch of a 
flying frog
by Wallace
m Figure 21.2 The 
intellectual context 
of Darwin’s ideas.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   503 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 505 ===

504 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
by which species accumulate differences from their ancestors 
as they adapt to different environments over time. Evolution 
can also be defined as a change in the genetic composition of a 
population from generation to generation (see Concept 23.3).
However it is defined, we can view evolution in two related 
but different ways: as a pattern and as a process. The pattern of 
evolutionary change is revealed by data from many scientific 
disciplines, including biology, geology, physics, and chem-
istry. These data are facts—they are observations about the 
natural world—and these observations show that life has 
evolved over time. The process of evolution consists of the 
mechanisms that cause the observed pattern of change. These 
mechanisms represent natural causes of the natural phenom-
ena we observe. Indeed, the power of evolution as a unifying 
theory is its ability to explain and connect a vast array of 
observations about the living world.
As with all general theories in science, we continue to test 
our understanding of evolution by examining whether it can 
account for new observations and experimental results. In 
this and the following chapters, we’ll examine how ongoing 
discoveries shape what we know about the pattern and pro-
cess of evolution.
We’ll begin our exploration of these discoveries by retracing 
Darwin’s quest to explain the adaptations, unity, and diversity 
of what he called life’s “endless forms most beautiful.”
Scala Naturae and Classification of Species
Long before Darwin was born, several Greek philosophers 
suggested that life might have changed gradually over time. 
But one philosopher who greatly influenced early Western 
science, Aristotle (384–322 !"#), viewed species as fixed 
(unchanging). Through his observations of nature, Aristotle 
recognized certain “affinities” among organisms. He con-
cluded that life-forms could be arranged on a ladder, or scale, 
of increasing complexity, later called the scala naturae (“scale 
of nature”). Each form of life, perfect and permanent, had its 
allotted rung on this ladder.
These ideas were generally consistent with the Old Testa-
ment account of creation, which holds that species were indi-
vidually designed by God and therefore perfect. In the 1700s, 
many scientists interpreted the often remarkable ways in 
which organisms are well suited for life in their environment 
as evidence that the Creator had designed each species for a 
particular purpose.
One such scientist was Carolus Linnaeus (1707–1778), a 
Swedish physician and botanist who sought to classify life’s 
diversity, in his words, “for the greater glory of God.” In the 
1750s, Linnaeus developed the two-part, or binomial, format 
for naming species (such as Homo sapiens for humans) that is 
still used today. In contrast to the linear hierarchy of the scala 
naturae, Linnaeus used a nested classification system, group-
ing similar species into increasingly inclusive categories. 
For example, similar species are grouped in the same genus, 
Older stratum 
with older fossils
Younger stratum 
with more recent 
fossils
1     Rivers carry sediment into
aquatic habitats such as seas and 
swamps. Over time, sedimentary 
rock layers (strata) form under 
water. Some strata contain fossils.
2     As water levels 
change and 
geological activity 
pushes layers of rock 
upward, the strata 
and their fossils are 
exposed.
. Figure 21.3 Formation of sedimentary strata with fossils.
 Mastering Biology Video: Grand Canyon
similar genera (plural of genus) are grouped in the same fam-
ily, and so on.
Linnaeus did not ascribe the resemblances among spe-
cies to evolutionary kinship, but rather to the pattern of 
their creation. A century later, however, Darwin argued that 
classification should be based on evolutionary relationships. 
He also noted that scientists using the Linnaean system often 
grouped organisms in ways that reflected those relationships.
Ideas About Change over Time
Among other sources of information, Darwin drew from the 
work of scientists studying fossils, the remains or traces of 
organisms from the past. Many fossils are found in sedimen-
tary rocks formed from the sand and mud that settle to the 
bottom of seas, lakes, and swamps (Figure 21.3). New layers 
of sediment cover older ones and compress them into super-
imposed layers of rock called strata (singular, stratum). The 
fossils in a particular stratum provide a glimpse of some of the 
organisms that populated Earth at the time that layer formed. 
Later, erosion may carve through upper (younger) strata, 
revealing deeper (older) strata that had been buried.
Paleontology, the study of fossils, was developed in large 
part by French scientist Georges Cuvier (1769–1832). In exam-
ining strata near Paris, Cuvier noted that the older the stratum, 
the more dissimilar its fossils were to current life-forms. He also 
observed that from one layer to the next, some new species 
appeared while others disappeared. He inferred that extinc-
tions must have been a common occurrence, but he staunchly 
opposed the idea of evolution. Cuvier speculated that each 
boundary between strata represented a sudden catastrophic 
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   504 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 506 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 505
show that traits acquired by use during an individual’s life are 
not inherited in the way proposed by Lamarck (Figure 21.4).
Lamarck was vilified in his own time, especially by Cuvier, 
who denied that species ever evolve. In retrospect, however, 
Lamarck did recognize that the fact that organisms are well-
suited for life in their environments can be explained by 
gradual evolutionary change, and he did propose a testable 
explanation for how this change occurs.
event, such as a flood, that had destroyed many of the species 
living in that area. Such regions, he reasoned, were later repop-
ulated by different species immigrating from other areas.
In contrast to Cuvier’s emphasis on sudden events, other 
scientists suggested that profound change could take place 
through the cumulative effect of slow but continuous pro-
cesses. In 1795, Scottish geologist James Hutton (1726–1797) 
proposed that Earth’s geologic features could be explained  
by gradual mechanisms, such as valleys being formed by riv-
ers. The leading geologist of Darwin’s time, Charles Lyell  
(1797–1875), incorporated Hutton’s thinking into his pro-
posal that the same geologic processes are operating today as 
in the past, and at the same rate.
Hutton’s and Lyell’s ideas strongly influenced Darwin’s 
thinking. Darwin agreed that if geologic change results from 
slow, continuous actions rather than from sudden events, then 
Earth must be much older than the widely accepted age of a few 
thousand years. It would, for example, take a very long time 
for a river to carve a canyon by erosion. He later reasoned that 
perhaps similarly slow and subtle processes could produce sub-
stantial biological change. However, Darwin was not the first to 
apply the idea of gradual change to biological evolution.
Lamarck’s Hypothesis of Evolution
Although some 18th-century naturalists suggested that 
life evolves as environments change, only one proposed a 
mechanism for how life changes over time: French biologist 
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck (1744–1829). Alas, Lamarck is pri-
marily remembered today not for his visionary recognition 
that evolutionary change explains patterns in fossils and how 
organisms are well suited for their environments, but for the 
incorrect mechanism he proposed.
Lamarck published his hypothesis in 1809, the year 
Darwin was born. By comparing living species with fossil 
forms, Lamarck had found what appeared to be several lines 
of descent, each a chronological series of older to younger fos-
sils leading to a living species. He explained his findings using 
two principles that were widely accepted at the time. The 
first was use and disuse, the idea that parts of the body that are 
used extensively become larger and stronger, while those that 
are not used deteriorate. Among many examples, he cited a 
giraffe stretching its neck to reach leaves on high branches. 
The second principle, inheritance of acquired characteristics, 
stated that an organism could pass these modifications to its 
offspring. Lamarck reasoned that the long, muscular neck 
of the living giraffe had evolved over many generations as 
giraffes stretched their necks ever higher.
Lamarck also thought that evolution happens because 
organisms have an innate drive to become more complex. 
Darwin rejected this idea, but he, too, thought that variation 
was introduced into the evolutionary process in part by inher-
itance of acquired characteristics. Today, however, our under-
standing of genetics refutes this mechanism: Experiments 
CONCEPT CHECK 21.1
1. How did Hutton’s and Lyell’s ideas influence Darwin’s think-
ing about evolution?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Scientific hypotheses must be test-
able (see Concept 1.3). Applying this criterion, are Cuvier’s 
explanation of the fossil record and Lamarck’s hypothesis of 
evolution scientific? Explain your answer in each case.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
c Figure 21.4  
Acquired traits 
cannot be inherited. 
This bonsai tree was 
“trained” to grow as a 
dwarf by pruning and 
shaping. However, seeds 
from this tree would 
produce offspring of 
normal size.
CONCEPT 21.2
Descent with modification by 
natural selection explains the 
adaptations of organisms and the 
unity and diversity of life
As the 19th century dawned, it was generally thought that 
species had remained unchanged since their creation. A few 
clouds of doubt about the permanence of species were begin-
ning to gather, but no one could have forecast the thunder-
ing storm just beyond the horizon. How did Charles Darwin 
become the lightning rod for a revolutionary view of life?
Darwin’s Research
Charles Darwin (1809–1882) was born in Shrewsbury, in 
western England. Even as a boy, he had a consuming inter-
est in nature. When he was not reading nature books, he was 
fishing, hunting, riding, and collecting insects. However, 
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   505 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 507 ===

506 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
of Geology during the voyage. He experienced geologic change 
firsthand when a violent earthquake shook the coast of Chile, 
and he observed afterward that rocks along the coast had 
been thrust upward by several meters. Finding fossils of ocean 
organisms high in the Andes, Darwin inferred that the rocks 
containing the fossils must have been raised there by many 
similar earthquakes. These observations reinforced what he 
had learned from Lyell: Physical evidence did not support the 
traditional view that Earth was only a few thousand years old.
Darwin’s interest in the species (or fossils) found in an area 
was further stimulated by the Beagle’s stop at the Galápagos,  
a group of volcanic islands located near the equator about  
900 km west of South America (Figure 21.5). Darwin was fasci-
nated by the unusual organisms there. The birds he collected 
included several kinds of mockingbirds. These mockingbirds, 
though similar to each other, seemed to be different species. 
Some were unique to individual islands, while others lived on 
two or more adjacent islands. Furthermore, although the ani-
mals on the Galápagos resembled species living on the South 
American mainland, most of the Galápagos species were not 
known from anywhere else in the world. Darwin hypoth-
esized that the Galápagos had been colonized by organisms 
that had strayed from South America and then diversified, 
giving rise to new species on the various islands.
Darwin’s Focus on Adaptation
During the voyage of the Beagle, Darwin observed many exam-
ples of adaptations, inherited characteristics of organisms 
that enhance their survival and reproduction in specific envi-
ronments. Later, as he reassessed his observations, he began to 
perceive adaptation to the environment and the origin of new 
species as closely related processes. Could a new species arise 
Darwin’s father, a physician, could see no future for his son as 
a naturalist and sent him to medical school in Edinburgh. But 
Charles found medicine boring and surgery before the days of 
anesthesia horrifying. He quit medical school and enrolled at 
Cambridge University, intending to become a clergyman. (At 
that time, many scholars of science belonged to the clergy.)
At Cambridge, Darwin became the protégé of John 
Henslow, a botany professor. Soon after Darwin graduated, 
Henslow recommended him to Captain Robert FitzRoy, who 
was readying the survey ship HMS Beagle for a voyage around 
the world. Darwin would pay his own way and serve as a 
conversation partner to the young captain. FitzRoy, who was 
himself an adept scientist, accepted Darwin because he was a 
skilled naturalist and they were of similar age and social class.
The Voyage of the Beagle
Darwin embarked from England on the Beagle in December 
1831. The primary mission of the voyage was to chart stretches 
of the South American coast that were poorly known to 
Europeans. Darwin, however, spent most of his time on shore, 
observing and collecting thousands of plants and animals. He 
described features of organisms that made them well suited 
to such diverse environments as the humid jungles of Brazil, 
the expansive grasslands of Argentina, and the towering peaks 
of the Andes. He also noted that the plants and animals in 
temperate regions of South America more closely resembled 
species living in the South American tropics than species liv-
ing in temperate regions of Europe. Furthermore, the fossils he 
found, though clearly different from living species, distinctly 
resembled the living organisms of South America.
Darwin also spent much time thinking about geology. 
Despite repeated bouts of seasickness, he read Lyell’s Principles 
PACIFIC
OCEANPinta
Genovesa
The
Galápagos
Islands
EquatorMarchena
Fernandina
Santa
Fe San
Cristobal
Floreana
Isabela Santa
Cruz
Santiago
Española
0 40 20
Kilometers
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
NORTH
AMERICA
Darwin in 1840,
after his return
from the
voyage
SOUTH
AMERICA
Great
Britain
Andes Mtns.
Cape Horn
Cape of
Good Hope
Brazil
Argentina
Chile
Equator Malay 
Archipelago
AFRICA
EUROPE
HMS Beagle in port
Tasmania
AUSTRALIA
New
Zealand
PACIFIC
OCEAN
. Figure 21.5 The voyage of HMS Beagle (December 1831–October 1836).
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   506 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 508 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 507
(a) Cactus-eater. The long, sharp beak of the 
common cactus finch (Geospiza scandens)
helps it tear and eat cactus flowers and pulp.
(b) Insect-eater. The green warbler finch 
(Certhidea olivacea) uses its narrow, pointed 
beak to grasp insects.
(c) Seed-eater. The large ground finch (Geospiza 
magnirostris) has a large beak adapted for 
cracking seeds found on the ground.
. Figure 21.6 Three examples of beak variation in Galápagos finches. The Galápagos Islands 
are home to more than a dozen species of closely related finches, some found only on a single island. 
A striking difference among them is their beaks, which are adapted for specific diets.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 1.20. Circle the most recent common ancestor shared 
by the three species that eat insects. Are all of the descendants of that ancestor insect-eaters?
book, titled On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection 
(commonly referred to as The Origin of Species), and published 
it the next year. Although Wallace had submitted his ideas 
for publication first, he admired Darwin and thought that 
Darwin had developed and tested the idea of natural selection 
so extensively that he should be known as its main architect.
Within a decade, Darwin’s book and its proponents had 
convinced most scientists that life’s diversity is the product 
of evolution. Darwin succeeded where previous evolutionists 
had failed by presenting a plausible scientific mechanism with 
immaculate logic and an avalanche of supporting evidence.
from an ancestral form by the gradual accumulation of adap-
tations to a different environment? From studies made years 
after Darwin’s voyage, biologists have concluded that this is 
indeed what happened to a diverse group of finches found on 
the Galápagos Islands (see Figure 1.20). The finches’ various 
beaks and behaviors are adapted to the specific foods avail-
able on their home islands (Figure 21.6). Darwin realized that 
explaining such adaptations was essential to understanding 
evolution. His explanation of how adaptations arise centered 
on natural selection, a process in which individuals that 
have certain inherited traits tend to survive and reproduce at 
higher rates than do other individuals because of those traits. 
By the early 1840s, Darwin had worked out the major features 
of his hypothesis. He set these ideas on paper in 1844, when 
he wrote a long essay on descent with modification and its 
underlying mechanism, natural selection. Yet he was still 
reluctant to publish his ideas, in part because he anticipated 
the uproar they would cause. During this time, Darwin contin-
ued to compile evidence in support of his hypothesis. By the 
mid-1850s, he had described his ideas to Lyell and a few oth-
ers. Lyell, who was not yet convinced of evolution, neverthe-
less urged Darwin to publish on the subject before someone 
else came to the same conclusions and published first.
In June 1858, Lyell’s prediction came true. Darwin received 
a manuscript from Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913), a 
British naturalist working in the South Pacific islands of the 
Malay Archipelago (see Figure 21.2). Wallace had developed 
a hypothesis of natural selection nearly identical to Darwin’s. 
He asked Darwin to evaluate his paper and forward it to 
Lyell if it merited publication. Darwin complied, writing to 
Lyell: “Your words have come true with a vengeance . . . . I 
never saw a more striking coincidence . . . so all my original-
ity, whatever it may amount to, will be smashed.” On July 1, 
1858, Lyell and a colleague presented Wallace’s paper, along 
with extracts from Darwin’s unpublished 1844 essay, to the 
Linnean Society of London. Darwin quickly finished his 
Ideas from The Origin of Species
In his book, Darwin amassed evidence that descent with 
modification by natural selection explains three broad obser-
vations about nature—the unity of life, the diversity of life, 
and the striking ways in which organisms are suited for life in 
their environments.
Descent with Modification
In the first edition of The Origin of Species, Darwin never used 
the word evolution (although the final word of the book is 
“evolved”). Rather, he discussed descent with modification, a 
phrase that summarized his view of life. Organisms share many 
characteristics, leading Darwin to perceive unity in life. He 
attributed the unity of life to the descent of all organisms from 
an ancestor that lived in the remote past. He also thought that 
as the descendants of that ancestral organism lived in various 
habitats, they gradually accumulated diverse modifications, or 
adaptations, that fit them to specific ways of life. Thus, Darwin 
thought of evolution as a process in which both descent (shared 
ancestry, resulting in shared characteristics) and modification 
(the accumulation of differences) can be observed.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Origin  
of Species: The Making of a Theory  
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   507 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 509 ===

508 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Darwin reasoned that over a long period of time, descent 
with modification eventually led to the rich diversity of life 
we see today. He viewed the history of life as a tree, with mul-
tiple branchings from a common trunk out to the tips of the 
youngest twigs (Figure 21.7). In his diagram, the tips of the 
twigs that are labeled A–D represent several groups of organ-
isms living in the present day, while the unlabeled branches 
represent groups that are extinct. Each fork of the tree repre-
sents the most recent common ancestor of all the lines of evo-
lution that subsequently branch from that point.
Darwin thought that such a branching process, along with 
past extinction events, could explain the large morphological 
gaps that sometimes exist between related groups of organisms. 
As an example, let’s consider the three living species of elephants: 
the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) and two species of African 
elephants (Loxodonta africana and L. cyclotis). These closely 
related species are very similar because they shared the same 
line of descent until a relatively recent split from their common 
ancestor, as shown in the tree diagram in Figure 21.8. Note that 
seven lineages related to elephants have become extinct over the 
past 32 million years. As a result, there are no living species that 
fill the morphological gap between the elephants and their near-
est relatives today, the hyraxes and manatees.
Extinctions like those in Figure 21.8 are common. In fact, 
many evolutionary branches, even some major ones, are dead 
ends: Scientists estimate that over 99% of all species that have 
ever lived are now extinct. As in Figure 21.8, fossils of extinct 
species can document the divergence of present-day groups 
by “filling in” gaps between them.
Artificial Selection, Natural Selection,  
and Adaptation
Darwin proposed the mechanism of natural selection to 
explain the observable patterns of evolution. He crafted his 
argument carefully, hoping to persuade even the most skepti-
cal readers. First he discussed familiar examples of selective 
breeding of domesticated plants and animals. Humans have 
modified other species over many generations by selecting 
and breeding individuals that possess desired traits, a process 
c Figure 21.7  
“I think . . . .” 
In this 1837 
sketch, Darwin 
envisioned the 
branching pattern 
of evolution. 
Branches that end 
in twigs labeled A–D 
represent particular 
groups of living 
organisms; all other 
branches represent 
extinct groups.
3460 24
Millions of years ago Years ago
5.5 2 1040
†Barytherium
†Mammut
†Stegodon
†Platybelodon
†Mammuthus
†Deinotherium
†Moeritherium
Elephas
maximus
(Asia)
Loxodonta 
africana
(Africa)
Loxodonta cyclotis
(Africa)
Hyracoidea
(Hyraxes)
Sirenia
(Manatees
and relatives)
Common 
ancestor of 
living elephant 
species
. Figure 21.8 Descent with modification. This evolutionary 
tree of elephants and their relatives is based mainly on fossils—their 
anatomy, order of appearance in strata, and geographic distribution. 
Note that most branches of descent ended in extinction (denoted by 
the dagger symbol, †). (Time line not to scale.)
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this tree, approximately when did the most 
recent ancestor shared by Mammuthus (woolly mammoths), Asian 
elephants, and African elephants live?
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   508 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 510 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 509
called artificial selection (Figure 21.9). As a result of arti-
ficial selection, crops, livestock animals, and pets often bear 
little resemblance to their wild ancestors.
Darwin then argued that a similar process occurs in nature. 
He based his argument on two observations, from which he 
drew two inferences:
Observation #1: Members of a population often vary in 
their inherited traits (Figure 21.10).
Observation #2: All species can produce more offspring 
than their environment can support (Figure 21.11), and 
many of these offspring fail to survive and reproduce.
Inference #1: Individuals whose inherited traits give 
them a higher probability of surviving and reproducing in 
a given environment tend to leave more offspring than do 
other individuals.
Inference #2: This unequal ability of individuals to sur-
vive and reproduce will lead to the accumulation of favor-
able traits in the population over generations.
As these two inferences suggest, Darwin saw a connection 
between natural selection and the capacity of organisms to “over-
reproduce.” He began to make this connection after reading an 
essay by economist Thomas Malthus, who contended that much 
of human suffering—disease, famine, and war—resulted from 
the human population’s potential to increase faster than food 
supplies and other resources. Darwin similarly realized that the 
capacity to overreproduce was typical of all species. Of the many 
eggs laid, young born, and seeds spread, only a fraction complete 
their development and leave offspring of their own. The rest are 
starved, eaten, diseased, unmated, or unable to tolerate physical 
conditions of the environment such as salinity or temperature.
An organism’s heritable traits can influence not only its 
own performance, but also how well its offspring cope with 
c Figure 21.9 Artificial selection. These 
different vegetables have all been selected 
from one species of wild mustard (Brassica 
oleracea). By selecting variations in different 
parts of the plant, breeders have obtained 
these divergent results.
. Figure 21.10 Variation in a population. Individuals in this 
population of Asian ladybird beetles (Harmonia axyridis) vary in 
color and spot pattern. Natural selection may act on these variations 
only if (1) they are heritable and (2) they affect the beetles’ ability to 
survive and reproduce.
Spore
cloud
c Figure 21.11  
Overproduction 
of offspring. A 
single puffball 
fungus can produce 
billions of spores 
that give rise to 
offspring. If all of 
these offspring and 
their descendants 
survived to 
maturity, they 
would carpet the 
surrounding land 
surface.
Broccoli
KohlrabiWild mustardKale
Cabbage
Selection for
apical (tip) bud
Selection for
flowers 
and stems
Selection
for stemsSelection
for leaves
Selection for
axillary (side)
budsBrussels sprouts
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   509 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 511 ===

510 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
environmental challenges. For example, an organism might 
have a trait that gives its offspring an advantage in escaping 
predators, obtaining food, or tolerating physical conditions. 
When such advantages increase the number of offspring 
that survive and reproduce, the traits that are favored will 
likely appear at a greater frequency in the next generation. 
Thus, over time, natural selection resulting from factors 
such as predators, lack of food, or adverse physical condi-
tions can lead to an increase in the proportion of favorable 
traits in a population.
How rapidly do such changes occur? Darwin reasoned that 
if artificial selection can bring about dramatic change in a 
relatively short period of time, then natural selection should 
be capable of substantial modification of species over many 
hundreds of generations. Even if the advantages of some 
heritable traits over others are slight, the advantageous varia-
tions will gradually accumulate in the population, and less 
favorable variations will diminish. Over time, this process will 
increase the frequency of individuals with favorable adapta-
tions, hence increasing the degree to which organisms are 
well suited for life in their environment.
Key Features of Natural Selection
Let’s now summarize some of the main ideas of natural 
selection:
• Natural selection is a process in which individuals that have 
certain heritable traits survive and reproduce at a higher 
rate than do other individuals because of those traits.
• Over time, natural selection can increase the frequency 
of adaptations that are favorable in a given environment 
(Figure 21.12).
• If an environment changes, or if individuals move to a 
new environment, natural selection may result in adap-
tation to these new conditions, sometimes giving rise to 
new species.
One subtle but important point is that although natural 
selection occurs through interactions between individual 
organisms and their environment, individuals do not evolve. 
Rather, it is the population that evolves over time.
A second key point is that natural selection can amplify 
or diminish only those heritable traits that differ among the 
individuals in a population. Thus, even if a trait is heritable, if 
all the individuals in a population are genetically identical for 
that trait, evolution by natural selection cannot occur.
Third, environmental factors vary from place to place 
and over time. A trait that is favorable in one place or time 
may be useless—or even detrimental—in other places or 
times. Natural selection is always operating, but which 
traits are favored depends on the context in which a species 
lives and mates.
Next, we’ll survey the wide range of observations that sup-
port a Darwinian view of evolution by natural selection.
(a)
(b)
m Figure 21.12 Camouflage as an example of evolutionary 
adaptation. Related species of moths have diverse shapes and 
colors that evolved in different environments, as seen in this dead-
leaf moth (Oxytenis modestia) in Peru (a) and buff-end moth 
(Phalera bucephala) in Scotland (b).
CONCEPT CHECK 21.2
1. How does the concept of descent with modification explain 
both the unity and diversity of life?
2. WHAT IF? If you discovered a fossil of an extinct mam-
mal that lived high in the Andes, would you predict that it 
would more closely resemble present-day mammals from 
South American jungles or present-day mammals that live 
high in Asian mountains? Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the relationship between 
genotype and phenotype (see Figures 14.5 and 14.6). 
Suppose that in a particular pea population, flowers with the 
white phenotype are favored by natural selection. Predict 
what would happen over time to the frequency of the white-
flower allele (the p allele) in the population.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Evolution is supported by an 
overwhelming amount of scientific 
evidence
In The Origin of Species, Darwin marshaled a broad range of 
evidence to support the concept of descent with modifica-
tion. Still—as he readily acknowledged—there were instances 
CONCEPT 21.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   510 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 512 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 511
/uni25BC Figure 21.13 Inquiry
Can a change in a population’s food source 
result in evolution by natural selection?
Field Study Soapberry  
bugs feed most effectively 
when the length of their 
“beak” is similar to the  
depth of the seeds within  
the fruit. Researchers 
measured beak lengths  
in soapberry bug popula-
tions feeding on the native 
balloon vine. They also 
measured beak lengths in 
populations feeding on the 
introduced golden rain tree.  
The researchers then com-
pared the measurements 
with those of museum 
specimens collected in the 
two areas before the golden 
rain tree was introduced.
Results Beak lengths were shorter in populations feeding 
on the introduced species than in populations feeding on the 
native species, in which the seeds are buried more deeply. The 
average beak length in museum specimens from each popula-
tion (indicated by red arrows) was similar to beak lengths in 
populations feeding on native species.
Number of individuals
10On native species,
balloon vine
(southern Florida)8
6
4
0
2
10 On introduced 
species, 
golden rain tree 
(central Florida)
Average 
beak lengths 
in museum 
specimens
8
6
4
0
2
6789
Beak length (mm)
10 11
Conclusion Museum specimens and contemporary data 
suggest that a change in the seed depth of the soapberry 
bug’s food source can result in evolution by natural selection 
for a corresponding change in beak size.
Data from S. P. Carroll and C. Boyd, Host race radiation in the soapberry bug: 
natural history with the history, Evolution 46:1052–1069 (1992).
WHAT IF? Data from additional studies showed that when soapberry 
bug eggs from a population that fed on balloon vine fruits were then 
reared on golden rain tree fruits (or vice versa), the beak lengths of the 
adult insects were most similar to those in the population from which the 
eggs were initially obtained. Interpret these results.
Soapberry bug with beak
inserted in balloon vine fruit
in which key evidence was lacking. For example, Darwin 
referred to the origin of flowering plants as an “abominable 
mystery,” and he lamented the lack of fossils showing how 
earlier groups of organisms gave rise to new groups.
In the last 150 years, new discoveries have filled many of 
the gaps that Darwin identified. The origin of flowering plants, 
for example, is much better understood (see Concept 30.3),  
and many fossils have been discovered that signify the ori-
gin of new groups of organisms (see Concept 25.2). In this 
section, we’ll consider four types of data that document the 
pattern of evolution and illuminate how it occurs: direct 
observations, homology, the fossil record, and biogeography.
Direct Observations of Evolutionary Change
Biologists have documented evolutionary change in thou-
sands of scientific studies. We’ll examine many such studies 
throughout this unit, but let’s look at two examples here.
Natural Selection in Response to Introduced Species
Herbivores, animals that eat plants, often have adaptations 
that help them feed efficiently on their primary food sources. 
What happens when herbivores switch to a new food source 
with different characteristics?
An opportunity to study this question in nature is pro-
vided by soapberry bugs, which use their “beak”—a hollow, 
needlelike mouthpart—to feed on seeds located within the 
fruits of various plants. In southern Florida, the soapberry 
bug (Jadera haematoloma) feeds on the seeds of a native 
plant, the balloon vine (Cardiospermum corindum). In central 
Florida, however, where balloon vines have become rare, 
soapberry bugs feed on the seeds of the golden rain tree 
(Koelreuteria elegans), a species recently introduced from Asia.
Soapberry bugs feed most effectively when the length of 
their beak is similar to the depth at which seeds are found 
within the fruit. Golden rain tree fruit consists of three flat 
lobes, and its seeds are much closer to the fruit surface than 
are the seeds of the plump, round fruit of the native balloon 
vine. These differences led researchers to predict that in 
populations that feed on golden rain tree, natural selection 
would result in beaks that are shorter than those in popula-
tions that feed on balloon vine (Figure 21.13). Indeed, beak 
lengths are shorter in the populations that feed on golden 
rain tree.
Researchers have also studied beak length evolution in 
soapberry bug populations that feed on plants introduced to 
Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Australia. In each of these loca-
tions, the fruit of the introduced plants is larger than the 
fruit of the native plant. Thus, in populations feeding on 
introduced species in these regions, researchers predicted that 
natural selection would result in the evolution of longer beaks. 
Again, data collected in field studies upheld this prediction.
The observed changes in beak lengths had important 
consequences. In Australia, for example, the increase in beak 
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   511 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 513 ===

512 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
length nearly doubled the success with which soapberry bugs 
could eat the seeds of the introduced species. Furthermore, 
since historical data show that the golden rain tree reached 
central Florida just 35 years before the scientific studies were 
initiated, the results demonstrate that natural selection can 
cause rapid evolution in a wild population.
The Evolution of Drug-Resistant Bacteria
An example of ongoing natural selection that dramatically 
affects humans is the evolution of drug-resistant pathogens 
(disease-causing organisms and viruses). This is a particular 
problem with bacteria and viruses because they can produce 
new generations in a short period of time; as a result, resistant 
strains of these pathogens can proliferate very quickly.
Consider the evolution of drug resistance in the bacterium 
Staphylococcus aureus. About one in three people harbor this 
species on their skin or in their nasal passages with no negative 
effects. However, certain genetic varieties (strains) of this species, 
known as methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), are formidable 
pathogens. Most MRSA infections are caused by recently appear-
ing strains such as clone USA300, which can cause “flesh-eating 
disease” and potentially fatal infections (Figure 21.14). How did 
clone USA300 and other strains of MRSA become so dangerous?
The story begins in 1943, when penicillin became the first 
widely used antibiotic. Since then, penicillin and other anti-
biotics have saved millions of lives. However, by 1945, more 
than 20% of the S. aureus strains seen in hospitals were already 
resistant to penicillin. These bacteria had an enzyme, penicil-
linase, that could destroy penicillin. Researchers responded 
by developing antibiotics that were not destroyed by penicil-
linase, but resistance to each new drug occurred rapidly.
For example, a promising new antibiotic, methicillin, was 
introduced in 1959. But by 1961, methicillin-resistant strains 
of S. aureus were observed. How did these resistant strains 
emerge? Methicillin works by deactivating an enzyme that 
bacteria use to synthesize their cell walls. However, some  
S. aureus populations included individuals that were able to 
synthesize their cell walls using a different enzyme that was 
not affected by methicillin. These individuals survived the 
methicillin treatments and reproduced at higher rates than 
did other individuals. Over time, these resistant individuals 
became increasingly common, leading to the spread of MRSA.
Initially, MRSA could be controlled by antibiotics that 
work differently from the way methicillin works. But this has 
become less effective because some MRSA strains are resis-
tant to multiple antibiotics—probably because bacteria can 
exchange genes with members of their own and other spe-
cies. Thus, the multidrug-resistant strains of today may have 
emerged over time as MRSA strains that were resistant to dif-
ferent antibiotics exchanged genes.
Finally, it is important to note that S. aureus is not the only 
pathogenic bacterium that has evolved resistance to multiple 
antibiotics. Furthermore, in recent decades, antibiotic resis-
tance has spread much faster than new antibiotics have been 
2,500,000
2,750,000
2,250,000
2,000,000
1,750,000
1,500,000
1,250,000
1,000,000
750,000
500,000
250,000 base pairs
Chromosome map
of S. aureus clone USA300
1
Methicillin resistance
Ability to colonize hosts
Increased disease severity
Increased gene exchange
(within species) and 
toxin production
Key to adaptations
The circular chromosome 
of clone USA300 has been 
sequenced and contains 
2,872,769 base pairs of DNA.
Regions highlighted in colors 
other than blue contain genes 
that increase the strain’s 
virulence (see the key).
. Figure 21.14 Clone USA300: a virulent strain of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Resistant to multiple 
antibiotics and highly contagious, this strain and its close relatives 
can cause lethal infections of the skin, lungs, and blood. As shown 
here, researchers have identified key areas of the USA300 genome 
that code for adaptations that cause its virulent properties.
WHAT IF? Some drugs being developed specifically target and kill only 
S. aureus; others slow the growth of MRSA but do not kill it. Based on 
how natural selection works and on the fact that bacterial species can 
exchange genes, explain why each of these strategies might be effective.
discovered—a problem of great public health concern. Hope 
may loom on the horizon, however. For example, scien-
tists recently reported the discovery of “teixobactin,” a new 
antibiotic that shows promise for treating MRSA and other 
pathogens. In addition, as we’ll describe in the Scientific Skills 
Exercise in Chapter 27, the methods used in the discovery of 
teixobactin may lead to the discovery of other new antibiotics 
as well.
The S. aureus and soapberry bug examples highlight three 
key points about natural selection. First, natural selection is a 
process of editing, not a creative mechanism. A drug does not 
create resistant pathogens; it selects for resistant individuals 
that are already present in the population. Second, in species 
that produce new generations in short periods of time, evolu-
tion by natural selection can occur rapidly—in just a few years 
(S. aureus) or decades (soapberry bugs). Third, natural selection 
depends on time and place. It favors those characteristics in a 
genetically variable population that provide an advantage in 
the current, local environment. What is beneficial in one situ-
ation may be useless or even harmful in another. Beak lengths 
suitable for the size of the typical fruit eaten by members of 
a particular soapberry bug population are favored by natural 
selection. However, a beak length suitable for fruit of one size 
can be disadvantageous when the bug is feeding on fruit of 
another size.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   512 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 514 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 513
function in the organism’s ancestors. For instance, snakes arose 
from ancestors with legs, and the skeletons of some snakes retain 
vestiges of the pelvis and leg bones of their ancestors. Likewise, 
blind species of cave fishes descended from ancestors with 
eyes—which explains why these blind fishes have eye remnants 
buried under their scales. We would not expect to see these vesti-
gial structures if snakes and blind cave fishes had origins separate 
from those of other vertebrate animals.
Biologists also observe similarities among organisms at 
the molecular level. All forms of life use essentially the same 
genetic code, suggesting that all species descended from com-
mon ancestors that used this code. But molecular homologies 
go beyond a shared code. For example, organisms as dissimi-
lar as humans and bacteria share genes inherited from a very 
distant common ancestor. Some of these homologous genes 
Homology
A second type of evidence 
for evolution comes from 
analyzing similarities among 
different organisms. As we’ve 
discussed, evolution is a 
process of descent with modi-
fication: Characteristics pres-
ent in an ancestral organism 
are altered (by natural selec-
tion) in its descendants over 
time as they face different 
environmental conditions. 
As a result, related species 
can have characteristics that 
have an underlying similar-
ity yet function differently. 
Similarity resulting from 
common ancestry is known 
as homology. As we’ll 
describe, an understanding 
of homology can be used to make testable predictions and 
explain observations that are otherwise puzzling.
Anatomical and Molecular Homologies
The view of evolution as a remodeling process leads to the 
prediction that closely related species should share similar 
features—and they do. Of course, closely related species share 
the features used to determine their relationship, but they also 
share many other features. Some of these shared features make 
little sense except in the context of evolution. For example, 
the forelimbs of all mammals—including humans, cats, 
whales, and bats—show the same arrangement of bones from 
the shoulder to the tips of the digits, even though the append-
ages have very different functions: lifting, walking, swim-
ming, and flying (Figure 21.15). Such striking anatomical 
resemblances would be highly unlikely if these structures had 
arisen anew in each species. Rather, the underlying skeletons 
of the arms, forelegs, flippers, and wings of different mammals 
are homologous structures that represent variations on a 
structural theme that was present in their common ancestor.
Comparing early stages of development in different animal 
species reveals additional anatomical homologies not visible 
in adult organisms. For example, at some point in their devel-
opment, all vertebrate embryos have a tail located posterior 
to (behind) the anus, as well as structures called pharyngeal 
(throat) arches (Figure 21.16). These homologous arches ulti-
mately develop into structures with very different functions, 
such as gills in fishes and parts of the ears and throat in humans 
and other mammals.
Some of the most intriguing homologies concern “leftover” 
structures of marginal, if any, importance to the organism. These 
vestigial structures are remnants of features that served a 
Human
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Carpals
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Cat Whale Bat
. Figure 21.15 Mammalian forelimbs: homologous structures. Even though they have become 
adapted for different functions, the forelimbs of all mammals are constructed from the same basic skeletal 
elements: one large bone (purple), attached to two smaller bones (orange and tan), attached to several 
small bones (gold), attached to several metacarpals (green), attached to approximately five digits, each of 
which is composed of multiple phalanges (blue).
Chick embryo (LM) Human embryo
Pharyngeal
arches
Post-anal
tail
. Figure 21.16 Anatomical similarities in vertebrate 
embryos. At some stage in their embryonic development, all 
vertebrates have a tail located posterior to the anus (referred to as a 
post-anal tail), as well as pharyngeal (throat) arches. Descent from a 
common ancestor can explain such similarities.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   513 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 515 ===

514 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
descended from ancestor 1, whereas mammals, lizards and 
snakes, crocodiles, and birds all descended from ancestor 3. 
As expected, the three homologies shown on the tree—limbs 
with digits, the amnion (a protective embryonic membrane), 
and feathers—form a nested pattern. Limbs with digits were 
present in common ancestor 2 and hence are found in all of 
the descendants of that ancestor (the tetrapods). The amnion 
was present only in ancestor 3 and hence is shared only by 
some tetrapods (mammals and reptiles). Feathers were pres-
ent only in ancestor 6 and hence are found only in birds.
To explore “tree thinking” further, note that in Figure 21.17 
mammals are positioned closer to amphibians than to birds. As 
a result, you might conclude that mammals are more closely 
related to amphibians than they are to birds. However, mam-
mals are actually more closely related to birds than to amphib-
ians because mammals and birds share a more recent common 
ancestor (ancestor 3) than do mammals and amphibians 
(ancestor 2). Ancestor 2 is also the most recent common 
ancestor of birds and amphibians, making mammals and birds 
equally related to amphibians. Finally, note that the tree in 
Figure 21.17 shows the relative timing of events but not their 
actual dates. Thus, we can conclude that ancestor 2 lived 
before ancestor 3, but we do not know when that was.
Evolutionary trees are hypotheses that summarize our cur-
rent understanding of patterns of descent. Our confidence in 
these relationships, as with any hypothesis, depends on the 
strength of the supporting data. In the case of Figure 21.17, 
the tree is supported by many different data sets, including 
both anatomical and DNA sequence data. As a result, biolo-
gists are confident that it accurately reflects evolutionary 
history. Scientists can use such well-supported evolutionary 
trees to make specific and sometimes surprising predictions 
about organisms (see Figure 22.17).
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this evolutionary tree, are 
crocodiles more closely related to lizards or birds? Explain.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
c Figure 21.17 Tree thinking: 
information provided in an 
evolutionary tree. This evolutionary 
tree for tetrapods and their closest living 
relatives, the lungfishes, is based on 
anatomical and DNA sequence data. The 
purple hatch marks indicate the origin of 
three important homologies, each of which 
evolved only once. Birds are nested within 
and evolved from reptiles; hence, the group 
of organisms called “reptiles” technically 
includes birds.
have acquired new functions, while others, such as those 
coding for the ribosomal subunits used in protein synthesis 
(see Figure 17.18), have retained their original functions. It 
is also common for organisms to have genes that have lost 
their function, even though the homologous genes in related 
species may be fully functional. Like vestigial structures, it 
appears that such inactive “pseudogenes” may be present 
simply because a common ancestor had them.
Homologies and “Tree Thinking”
Some homologous characteristics, such as the genetic code, 
are shared by all species because they date to the deep ancestral 
past. In contrast, homologous characteristics that evolved more 
recently are shared only within smaller groups of organisms.
Consider the tetrapods (from the Greek tetra, four, and pod, 
foot), the vertebrate group that consists of amphibians, mam-
mals, and reptiles. Like all vertebrates, tetrapods have a back-
bone. But unlike other vertebrates, tetrapods also have limbs 
with digits (see Figure 21.15). As suggested by this example, 
homologous characteristics form a nested pattern: All life 
shares the deepest layer (in this case, all vertebrates have a 
backbone), and each successive smaller group adds its own 
homologies to those it shares with larger groups (in this case, 
all tetrapods have a backbone and limbs with digits). This 
nested pattern is exactly what we would expect to result from 
descent with modification from a common ancestor.
Biologists often represent the pattern of descent from common 
ancestors with an evolutionary tree, a diagram that reflects 
evolutionary relationships among groups of organisms. We will 
explore evolutionary trees in more detail in Chapter 22, but for 
now, let’s consider how we can interpret and use such trees.
Figure 21.17 is an evolutionary tree of tetrapods and 
their closest living relatives, the lungfishes. In this diagram, 
each branch point represents the most 
recent common ancestor of the two 
lineages diverging from that point. For 
example, lungfishes and all tetrapods 
 Lungfishes
Amphibians
Mammals
Lizards
and snakes
Crocodiles
Ostriches
Hawks and
other birds
Amnion
T etrapods
Reptiles
Amniotes
Birds
Limbs with
digits
Feathers
1
2
3
4
5
6
Each branch point represents the common ancestor 
of the two lineages diverging from that point.
A hatch mark represents a 
homologous characteristic 
shared by all the groups 
to the right of the mark.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   514 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 516 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 515
closely related to even-toed ungulates, a group that includes 
hippopotamuses, pigs, deer, and cows.
What else can fossils tell us about cetacean origins? The earli-
est cetaceans lived 50–60 million years ago. The fossil record 
indicates that prior to that time, most mammals were terrestrial. 
Although scientists had long realized that whales and other 
cetaceans originated from land mammals, few fossils had been 
found that revealed how cetacean limb structure had changed 
over time, leading eventually to the development of flippers as 
well as to the loss of hind limbs and the development of flukes 
(the lobes on a whale’s tail). In the past few decades, however, 
a series of remarkable fossils have been discovered in Pakistan, 
Egypt, and North America. These fossils document steps in the 
transition from life on land to life in the sea, filling in some of 
the gaps between ancestral and living cetaceans (Figure 21.20).
Finally, although living cetaceans look very different from 
living even-toed ungulates, the fossil discoveries show that 
extinct early cetaceans such as Pakicetus looked fairly similar 
A Different Cause of Resemblance:  
Convergent Evolution
Although organisms that are closely related share characteris-
tics because of common descent, distantly related organisms 
can resemble one another for a different reason: convergent 
evolution, the independent evolution of similar features in 
different lineages. Consider marsupial mammals, many of 
which live in Australia. Marsupials are distinct from another 
group of mammals—the eutherians, or placental mammals—
few of which live in Australia. (Eutherians complete their 
embryonic development in the uterus, whereas marsupials are 
born as embryos and complete their development while nurs-
ing, often in an external pouch.) Some Australian marsupials 
have eutherian look-alikes with superficially similar adapta-
tions. For instance, a forest-dwelling Australian marsupial 
called the sugar glider is superficially very similar to flying 
squirrels, gliding eutherians that live in North American forests 
(Figure 21.18). But the sugar glider has many other characteris-
tics that make it a marsupial, much more closely related to kan-
garoos and other Australian marsupials than to flying squirrels 
or other eutherians. Once again, our understanding of evolu-
tion can explain these observations. Although they evolved 
independently from different ancestors, these two mammals 
have adapted to similar environments in similar ways. In such 
examples in which species share features because of conver-
gent evolution, the resemblance is said to be analogous, not 
homologous. Analogous features share similar function, but 
not common ancestry, while homologous features share com-
mon ancestry, but not necessarily similar function.
The Fossil Record
A third type of evidence for evolution comes from fossils. The 
fossil record documents the pattern of evolution, showing that 
past organisms differed from present-day organisms and that 
many species have become extinct. Fossils also show the evolu-
tionary changes that have occurred in vari-
ous groups of organisms. To give one of 
hundreds of possible examples, researchers 
found that over several thousand years, 
the pelvic bone in fossil stickleback fish 
became greatly reduced in size. The con-
sistent nature of this change over time 
suggests that the reduction in the size of 
the pelvic bone may have been driven by 
natural selection.
Fossils can also shed light on the 
origins of new groups of organisms. An 
example is the fossil record of cetaceans, 
the mammalian order that includes 
whales, dolphins, and porpoises. Some 
of these fossils (Figure 21.19) provided 
strong support for a hypothesis based on 
DNA sequence data: that cetaceans are 
NORTH
AMERICA
AUSTRALIA
Flying squirrel
Sugar
glider
m Figure 21.18 Convergent evolution. 
The ability to glide through the air evolved 
independently in these two distantly 
related mammals.
Most mammals Cetaceans and even-toed ungulates
(a) Canis (dog) (b) Pakicetus (c) Sus (pig) (d) Odocoileus (deer)
. Figure 21.19 Ankle bones: one piece of the puzzle. Comparing fossils and present-day 
examples of the astragalus (a type of ankle bone) indicates that cetaceans are closely related 
to even-toed ungulates. (a) In most mammals, the astragalus is shaped like that of a dog, with 
a double hump on one end (red arrows) but not at the opposite end (blue arrow). (b) Fossils 
show that the early cetacean Pakicetus had an astragalus with double humps at both ends, 
a shape otherwise found only in pigs (c), deer (d), and all other even-toed ungulates.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   515 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 517 ===

516 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Dorudon
Rodhocetus
Hippopotamuses
Other
even-toed
ungulates
Pelvis and
hind limb bones
Living
cetaceans
Common
ancestor
of cetaceans
Millions of years ago
60
70
50
40
30
20
10
0
Key to cetacean pelvis
and hind limb bones
Pelvis
Femur
Tibia
Foot
Pakicetus
. Figure 21.20 The transition to life in the sea. Multiple lines of evidence support the hypothesis that cetaceans 
(yellow labels) evolved from terrestrial mammals. Fossils document the reduction over time in the pelvis and hind 
limb bones of extinct (†) cetacean ancestors, including Pakicetus, Rodhocetus, and Dorudon. DNA sequence data 
support the hypothesis that cetaceans are most closely related to hippopotamuses.
VISUAL SKILLS Use the diagram to determine which happened first during the evolution of  
cetaceans: changes in hind limb structure or the origin of tail flukes (the lobes on a whale’s tail). Explain.
to deer and other living even-toed 
ungulates. The extinct early ceta-
ceans also looked very similar to 
extinct early even-toed ungulates, 
such as Diacodexis  (Figure 21.19). 
Similar patterns are seen in fos-
sils documenting the origins of 
other groups of organisms, includ-
ing mammals (see Figure 25.7), flowering 
plants (see Concept 30.3), and tetrapods (see Figure 34.21). 
In each of these cases, the fossil record shows that over time, 
descent with modification produced increasingly large differ-
ences among related groups of organisms, ultimately result-
ing in the diversity of life today.
Biogeography
A fourth type of evidence comes from biogeography, the 
scientific study of the geographic distributions of species. These 
distributions are influenced by many factors, including conti-
nental drift, the slow movement of Earth’s continents over time. 
About 250 million years ago, these movements united all of 
Earth’s landmasses into a single large continent called Pangaea 
20 cm
. Figure 21.21  
Diacodexis, an early 
even-toed ungulate.
Aplochiton 
(two species;
South America)
Lovettia
(one species;
Tasmania, 
Australia)
Other genera
in the Galaxiidae
Common
ancestor
Millions of years ago
70
60
50
0
. Figure 21.22 Closely related freshwater fish separated by 
9,000 km of ocean. There are three species in these two closely 
related genera of freshwater fish within the family Galaxiidae. 
 Mastering Biology F i g u r e  W a l k t h r o u g h
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   516 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 518 ===

survive in salt water, so how can we explain their geographic 
distributions? These three species represent all known living 
descendants of a common ancestor. Since all of the living spe-
cies cannot survive in salt water, it is likely that their common 
ancestor also was restricted to freshwater habitats. At first 
glance, this only deepens the mystery—how could that ances-
tor or its descendants have swum across vast stretches of ocean? 
A clue comes from genetic analyses indicating that the evolu-
tionary lineages leading to these three species began to diverge 
about 55 million years ago. By that time, the southernmost 
portion of Pangaea was breaking apart into what would eventu-
ally become South America, Australia, and Antarctica. This sug-
gests that their ancestors had spread across southern Pangaea 
before it broke apart. At later times, these three freshwater spe-
cies originated on the continental regions where they currently 
live, resulting in their present-day geographic distribution.
What Is Theoretical About Darwin’s  
View of Life?
Some people dismiss Darwin’s ideas as “just a theory.” But the 
pattern of evolution—the observation that life has evolved 
(see Figure 25.16). Roughly 200 million years ago, Pangaea 
began to break apart; by 20 million years ago, the continents 
were within a few hundred kilometers of their present locations.
We can use our understanding of evolution and conti-
nental drift to predict where fossils of different groups of 
organisms might be found. For example, scientists have con-
structed evolutionary trees for horses based on anatomical 
data. These trees and the ages of fossils of horse ancestors sug-
gest that the genus that includes present-day horses (Equus) 
originated 5 million years ago in North America. Geologic 
evidence indicates that at that time, North and South 
America were not yet connected, making it difficult for horses 
to travel between them. Thus, we would predict that the old-
est Equus fossils should be found only on the continent on 
which the group originated—North America. This prediction 
and others like it for different groups of organisms have been 
upheld, providing more evidence for evolution.
Evolution also explains biogeographic data. For example, 
a group of three species of freshwater fish in the family 
Galaxiidae are found in regions separated by wide stretches 
of open ocean (Figure 21.22). None of these three species can 
Making and Testing Predictions
Can Predation Result in Natural Selection for Color Patterns 
in Guppies? Our understanding of evolution changes constantly 
as new observations lead to new hypotheses—and hence to new 
ways to test our understanding of evolutionary theory. Consider 
the wild guppies (Poecilia reticulata) that live in pools connected 
by streams on the Caribbean island of Trinidad. Male guppies 
have highly varied color patterns that are controlled by genes 
that are only expressed in adult males. Female guppies choose 
males with bright color patterns as mates more often than they 
choose males with drab coloring. But the bright colors that attract 
females also can make the males more conspicuous to predators. 
Researchers observed that in pools with few predator species, the 
benefits of bright colors appear to “win out,” and males are more 
brightly colored than in pools where predation is more intense.
One guppy predator, the killifish, preys on juvenile guppies 
that have not yet displayed their adult coloration. Researchers 
predicted that if adult guppies with drab colors were transferred 
to a pool with only killifish, eventually the descendants of these 
guppies would be more brightly colored (because of the female 
preference for brightly colored males).
Pools with killifish,
but no guppies 
prior to transplant
Guppies
transplanted
Pools with
pike-cichlids
and guppies
How the Experiment Was Done Researchers transplanted 200 
adult guppies from pools containing pike-cichlid fish, predators 
of adult guppies, to pools with only killifish, predators of juvenile 
guppies. They tracked the number of bright-colored spots and the 
total area of those spots on adult male guppies in each generation.
Data from the Experiment After 22 months (15 generations), 
researchers compared the color pattern data for guppies from 
the source and transplanted populations.
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Area of colored 
spots (mm2)
Source
population
Transplanted
population
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Number of
colored spots
Source
population
Transplanted
population
Data from J. A. Endler, Natural selection on color patterns in Poecilia reticulata, 
Evolution 34:76–91 (1980).
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Identify the following elements of hypothesis-based science 
in this example: (a) question, (b) hypothesis, (c) prediction, 
(d) control group, and (e) experimental group. (For additional 
information about hypothesis-based science, see Concept 1.3 
and the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
2. Explain how the types of data the researchers chose to collect 
enabled them to test their prediction.
3. What conclusion do you draw from the data presented above?
4. (a) Predict what would happen if, after 22 months, guppies 
from the transplanted population were returned to the source 
pool. (b) Describe an experiment to test your prediction.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   517 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 519 ===

periods of time: a few thousand years or less. Furthermore, 
evolutionary biologists now recognize that natural selection 
is not the only mechanism responsible for evolution. Indeed, 
the study of evolution today is livelier than ever as scientists 
use a wide range of experimental approaches and genetic 
analyses to test predictions based on natural selection and 
other evolutionary mechanisms.
Although Darwin’s theory attributes life’s diversity to 
natural processes, the diverse products of evolution are nev-
ertheless elegant and inspiring. As Darwin wrote in the final 
sentence of The Origin of Species, “There is grandeur in this 
view of life . . . [in which] endless forms most beautiful and 
most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.”
over time—is supported by a great deal of evidence. In addi-
tion, Darwin’s explanation of the process of evolution—that 
natural selection is the primary cause of the observed pattern 
of evolutionary change—makes sense of massive amounts of 
data. As the  Scientific Skills Exercise describes, the effects of 
natural selection also can be observed and tested in nature.
What, then, is theoretical about evolution? Keep in mind 
that the scientific meaning of the term theory is very differ-
ent from its meaning in everyday use. The colloquial use 
of the word theory comes close to what scientists mean by a 
hypothesis. In science, a theory is much more comprehensive 
than a hypothesis. A theory, such as the theory of evolution 
by natural selection, accounts for many observations and 
explains and integrates a great variety of phenomena. Such a 
unifying theory does not become widely accepted unless its 
predictions stand up to thorough and continual testing by 
experiment and additional observation (see Concept 1.3). As 
the rest of this unit demonstrates, this has certainly been the 
case with the theory of evolution by natural selection.
The skepticism of scientists as they continue to test theo-
ries prevents these ideas from becoming dogma. For example, 
although Darwin thought that evolution was a very slow pro-
cess, we now know that this isn’t always true. Populations can 
evolve rapidly, and new species can form in relatively short 
CONCEPT CHECK 21.3
1. Explain how the following statement is inaccurate: 
“Antibiotics have created drug resistance in MRSA.”
2. How does evolution account for (a) the similar mammalian 
forelimbs with different functions shown in Figure 21.15 
and (b) the similar forms of the two distantly related mam-
mals shown in Figure 21.18?
3. WHAT IF? Fossils show that dinosaurs originated 200–250 
million years ago. Would you expect the geographic distribu-
tion of early dinosaur fossils to be broad (on many continents) 
or narrow (on one or a few continents only)? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
21 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
the accumulation of adaptations. He refined his theory for 
many years and finally published it in 1859 after learning that 
Wallace had come to the same idea.
• In The Origin of Species, Darwin proposed that over long periods 
of time, descent with modification produced the rich diversity of 
life through the mechanism of natural selection.
Individuals in a population 
vary in their heritable 
characteristics.
Organisms produce more 
offspring than the 
environment can support.
Individuals that are well suited 
to their environment tend to leave more 
offspring than other individuals.
Over time, favorable traits 
accumulate in the population.
Inferences
and
Observations
? Describe how overreproduction and heritable variation relate to 
evolution by natural selection.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 21.1
The Darwinian revolution challenged traditional  
views of a young Earth inhabited by unchanging 
species (pp. 503–505)
• Darwin proposed that life’s diversity arose over long periods of 
time from ancestral species through natural selection, a departure 
from prevailing views. For example, Cuvier studied fossils but 
denied that evolution occurs; he proposed that sudden cata-
strophic events in the past caused species to disappear from an 
area. Lamarck hypothesized that species evolve, but the underly-
ing mechanisms he proposed are not supported by evidence.
? Why was the age of Earth important for Darwin’s ideas about evolution?
CONCEPT 21.2
Descent with modification by natural selection 
explains the adaptations of organisms and the unity 
and diversity of life (pp. 505–510)
• Darwin’s experiences during the voyage of the Beagle gave rise to 
his idea that new species originate from ancestral forms through 
518 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   518 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 520 ===

 CHAPTER 21  How Evolution Works 519
8. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS Write a short 
essay (about 100–150 words) evaluating whether changes 
to an organism’s physical environment are likely to result 
in evolutionary change. Use an example to support your 
reasoning.
9. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This honeypot ant (genus 
Myrmecocystus) can store 
liquid food inside its 
expandable abdomen. 
Consider other ants you 
are familiar with, and 
explain how a honeypot 
ant exemplifies three 
key features of life: 
adaptation, unity, and 
diversity.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Month 0 8 12
Mosquitoes Resistant* to DDT 4% 45% 77%
*Mosquitoes were considered resistant if they were not killed within 1 hour 
of receiving a dose of 4% DDT.
Data from C. F. Curtis et al., Selection for and against insecticide resistance 
and possible methods of inhibiting the evolution of resistance in mosquitoes, 
Ecological Entomology 3:273–287 (1978).
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How are some coral reefs responding to climate change?
Go to “Take the Heat” at
www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Explain why anatomical and 
molecular features often fit a similar nested pattern. In addition, 
describe a process that can cause this not to be the case.
7. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT Mosquitoes resistant to the 
pesticide DDT first appeared in India in 1959, but now are found 
throughout the world. (a) Graph the data in the table below. 
(b) After examining the graph, hypothesize why the percentage 
of mosquitoes resistant to DDT rose rapidly. (c) Suggest an 
explanation for the global spread of DDT resistance.
CONCEPT 21.3
Evolution is supported by an overwhelming amount  
of scientific evidence (pp. 510–518)
• Researchers have directly observed natural selection leading to 
evolution in many studies in diverse organisms.
• Organisms share characteristics because of common descent 
(homology) or because natural selection affects indepen-
dently evolving species in similar environments in similar ways 
(convergent evolution).
• Fossils show that past organisms differed from living organisms, 
that many species have become extinct, and that species have 
evolved over long periods of time; fossils also document the 
evolutionary origin of new groups of organisms.
• Evolutionary theory can explain some biogeographic patterns.
? Summarize the different lines of evidence supporting the hypothesis 
that cetaceans descended from land mammals and are closely related to 
even-toed ungulates.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   519 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 521 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C21_PRF.indd   520 3/14/20   2:44 AM

=== SIDE 522 ===

521
Figure 22.1 Although this animal resembles a snake, it is actually a legless lizard: 
the glass lizard Ophisaurus apodus. Why isn’t the glass lizard considered a snake? 
Biologists based this decision in part on a comparison of its traits with those of 
snakes—and the glass lizard does not have a highly mobile jaw or many vertebrae, 
two traits shared by all snakes.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 22
• Figure 22.12 Walkthrough: Using Derived 
Characters to Infer Phylogeny
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Misconception Questions
• Tutorial: Visualizing Phylogenetic 
Relationships
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• Phylogenetic Trees (Concept 22.3)
Study Tip
Label a drawing: The members of a 
sister group are each other’s closest 
relatives, making sister groups a 
useful way to describe evolutionary 
relationships. As in this example, identify 
the sister groups associated with each 
branch point in Figures 22.11, 22.12, 
22.14, and 22.16.
22.1 Phylogenies show evolutionary 
relationships p. 522
22.2 Phylogenies are inferred from 
morphological and molecular 
data p. 526
22.3 Shared characters are used to 
construct phylogenetic trees p. 527
22.4 An organism’s evolutionary history 
is documented in its genome p. 533
22.5 Molecular clocks help track 
evolutionary time p. 534
22.6 Our understanding of the tree of 
life continues to change based on 
new data p. 536
KEY CONCEPTS
Phylogenetic Reconstruction22
Frog
Chicken
Human
Mouse
Frogs form a sister group with the combined
chicken/human/mouse lineages
(the “frog–chicken/human/mouse” sister group)
Chicken–human/mouse
Human–mouse
How do biologists distinguish and categorize 
the millions of species on Earth?
Geckos
Snakes
Iguanas
Glass lizards
No limbs
No limbs
Four limbs
Hair
Fishes
Frogs
Chimps
Humans
Traits shared due to common ancestry are used to classify organisms 
into groups that reflect their evolutionary history:
This branch point represents the common 
ancestor of all the groups shown here.
A hatch mark 
represents a character 
shared by the groups to 
the right of the mark.
This common ancestor had limbs, as 
do geckos and iguanas, but limbs 
were lost in the lineages leading to 
snakes and glass lizards.
Chimps and 
humans form 
a sister group: 
They are each 
other’s closest 
relative.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   521 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 523 ===

522 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Geckos
Snakes
Iguanas
Monitor lizards
Glass lizards
ANCESTRAL
LIZARD
(with limbs)
No limbs
No limbs
. Figure 22.2 Convergent evolution of limbless bodies. A 
phylogeny based on DNA sequence data reveals that a legless body 
form evolved independently from legged ancestors in the lineages 
leading to glass lizards and to snakes.
binomial is the name of the genus (plural, genera) to which 
the species belongs. The second part, called the specific epi-
thet, is unique for each species within the genus. An example 
of a binomial is Panthera pardus, the scientific name for the 
leopard. Notice that the first letter of the genus is capitalized 
and the entire binomial is italicized. (Newly created scientific 
names are also “latinized”: You can name an insect you dis-
cover after a friend, but you must add a Latin ending.) Many 
of the more than 11,000 binomials assigned by Linnaeus are 
still used today, including the optimistic name he gave our 
own species—Homo sapiens, meaning “wise man.”
Hierarchical Classification
In addition to naming species, Linnaeus also grouped them 
into a hierarchy of increasingly inclusive categories. The first 
grouping is built into the binomial: Species that appear to be 
closely related are grouped into the same genus. For example, 
the leopard (Panthera pardus) belongs to a genus that also 
includes the African lion (Panthera leo), the tiger (Panthera 
tigris), and the jaguar (Panthera onca). Beyond genera, biologists 
employ progressively more comprehensive categories of clas-
sification. The classification system named after Linnaeus, the 
Linnaean system, places related genera in the same family, 
families into orders, orders into classes, classes into phyla 
(singular, phylum), phyla into kingdoms, and, more recently, 
kingdoms into domains (Figure 22.3). The resulting biologi-
cal classification of a particular organism is somewhat like a 
postal address identifying a person in a particular apartment, 
in a building with many apartments, on a street with many 
apartment buildings, in a city with many streets, and so on.
The named group at any level of the hierarchy is called a 
taxon (plural, taxa). In the leopard example, Panthera is a 
taxon at the genus level, and Mammalia is a taxon at the class 
level that includes all the many orders of mammals. Note that 
in the Linnaean system, taxa broader than the genus are not 
italicized, though they are capitalized.
Classifying species is a way to structure our human view 
of the world. We lump together various species of trees to 
which we give the common name of pines and distinguish 
them from other trees that we call firs. Systematists have 
decided that pines and firs are different enough to be placed 
in separate genera, yet similar enough to be grouped into the 
same family, Pinaceae. As with pines and firs, higher levels 
of classification are usually defined by particular characters 
chosen by systematists. However, characters that are useful 
for classifying one group of organisms may not be appropri-
ate for other organisms. For this reason, the larger categories 
often are not comparable between lineages; that is, an order 
of snails does not exhibit the same degree of morphological 
or genetic diversity as an order of mammals. As we’ll see, the 
placement of species into orders, classes, and so on also does 
not necessarily reflect evolutionary history.
Phylogenies show evolutionary 
relationships
The glass lizard in Figure 22.1 is part of the continuum of life 
extending from the earliest organisms to the great variety of 
species alive today. In this unit, we will survey this diversity 
and describe hypotheses regarding how it evolved.
To set the stage for surveying life’s diversity, in this chapter 
we consider how biologists trace phylogeny, the evolution-
ary history of a species or group of species. A phylogeny of liz-
ards and snakes, for example, indicates that both glass lizards 
and snakes evolved from lizards with legs—but they evolved 
from different lineages of legged lizards (Figure 22.2). Thus, it 
appears that their legless conditions evolved independently. 
As we’ll see, biologists reconstruct phylogenies like that in 
Figure 22.2 using systematics, a discipline focused on classi-
fying organisms and determining their evolutionary relation-
ships. We’ll begin by describing how organisms are named.
Binomial Nomenclature
Common names for organisms—such as monkey, finch, and 
lilac—convey meaning in casual usage, but they can also cause 
confusion. Each of these names, for example, refers to more 
than one species. Moreover, some common names do not accu-
rately reflect the kind of organism they signify. Consider these 
three “fishes”: jellyfish (a cnidarian), crayfish (a small, lobster-
like crustacean), and silverfish (an insect). And, of course, a 
given organism has different names in different languages.
To avoid ambiguity when communicating about their 
research, biologists refer to organisms by Latin scientific 
names. The two-part format of the scientific name, com-
monly called a binomial, was instituted in the 18th century 
by Carolus Linnaeus (see Concept 21.1). The first part of a 
CONCEPT 22.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   522 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 524 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 523
ancestor and all of its descendants. Using this approach, some 
commonly recognized groups become part of other groups 
previously at the same level of the Linnaean system. For exam-
ple, because birds evolved from a group of reptiles, Aves (the 
Linnaean class to which birds are assigned) is considered a sub-
group of Reptilia (also a class in the Linnaean system).
What We Can and Cannot Learn from 
Phylogenetic Trees
Regardless of how groups are named, a phylogenetic tree rep-
resents a hypothesis about evolutionary relationships. These 
relationships often are depicted as a series of dichotomies, or 
two-way branch points. Each branch point represents the 
common ancestor of the two evolutionary lineages diverg-
ing from it. An evolutionary lineage is a sequence of 
ancestral organisms leading to a particular descendant taxon. 
Figure 22.5 illustrates these elements of a phylogenetic tree 
and offers more tips on interpreting these diagrams.
Each tree in Figure 22.5 has a branch point that represents the 
common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans. Chimps and 
humans are an example of sister taxa, groups of organisms 
that share an immediate common ancestor that is not shared by 
any other group. Note that there is a sister group associated with 
each branch point in a tree (since each branch point represents 
the common ancestor of the lineages diverging from it).
The members of a sister group are each other’s closest 
relatives, making sister groups a useful way to describe the 
Linking Classification and Phylogeny
The evolutionary history of a group of organisms can be rep-
resented in a branching diagram called a phylogenetic tree. 
As in Figure 22.4, the branching pattern often matches how 
systematists have classified groups of organisms nested within 
more inclusive groups. Sometimes, however, systematists 
have placed a species within a genus (or other group) to which 
it is not most closely related. One reason for such a mistake 
might be that over the course of evolution, a species has lost 
a key feature shared by its close relatives. If DNA or other new 
evidence indicates that an organism has been misclassified, 
the organism may be reclassified to accurately reflect its evolu-
tionary history. Another issue is that while the Linnaean sys-
tem may distinguish groups, such as amphibians, mammals, 
reptiles, and other classes of vertebrates, it tells us nothing 
about these groups’ evolutionary relationships to one another.
Such difficulties in aligning Linnaean classification with phy-
logeny have led many systematists to propose that classification 
be based entirely on evolutionary relationships. In such systems, 
names are assigned only to groups that include a common 
Domain:
Eukarya 
Domain:
Bacteria Domain:
Archaea 
Kingdom:
Animalia
Phylum:
Chordata
Class:
Mammalia
Order:
Carnivora
Family:
Felidae
Genus:
Panthera
Species:
Panthera pardus
. Figure 22.3 Linnaean classification. At each level, or “rank,” 
species are placed in groups within more inclusive groups.
SpeciesGenusFamilyOrder
Panthera
pardus
(leopard)
Taxidea
taxus
(American
badger)
Lutra lutra
(European
otter)
Canis
latrans
(coyote)
Canis
lupus
(gray wolf)
Carnivora
Felidae MustelidaeCanidae
Panthera Taxidea LutraCanis
. Figure 22.4 The connection between classification and 
phylogeny. Hierarchical classification can reflect the branching 
patterns of phylogenetic trees. This tree shows evolutionary 
relationships between some of the taxa within order Carnivora, 
itself a branch of class Mammalia.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   523 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 525 ===

524 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
. Figure 22.5  VISUALIZING PHYLOGENETIC RELATIONSHIPS
A phylogenetic tree visually represents a hypothesis of how a group of organisms 
are related 6Jis Ƃgure eZplores JoY tJe Ya[ a tree is draYn conXe[s inforOation
Fishes
Frogs
Lizards
Chimps
Humans
Fishes
Fishes Frogs Lizards ChimpsHumans
Frogs Lizards Chimps Humans
Fishes
Rotation
Frogs
Lizards
Chimps
Humans Fishes
Frogs
Lizards
Chimps
Humans
Each horizontal branch represents an evolutionary 
lineage. The length of the branch is arbitrary 
unless the diagram speciﬁes that branch lengths 
represent information such as time or amount of 
genetic change (see Figure 22.13).
Each position along a branch represents an 
ancestor in the lineage leading to the taxon 
named at the tip.This branch point 
represents the common 
ancestor of all the animal 
groups shown in this tree.
Chimps and humans are an example of sister taxa, 
groups of organisms that share a common ancestor 
that is not shared by any other group. The 
members of a sister group are each other‘s closest 
relatives.
Note: The order of the taxa 
does NOT represent a 
sequence of evolution “leading 
to” the last taxon shown (in 
this tree, humans).
If you rotate the 
branches of the tree 
at left around the 
three blue points, the 
result is the tree at 
right. 
Parts of a Phylogenetic Tree
6Jis tree sJoYs JoY tJe ƂXe 
groups of organisms at the tips 
of tJe DrancJes called taZa are 
related. Each branch point 
represents the common ancestor 
of the evolutionary lineages 
diverging from it.
Alternative Forms of Tree Diagrams
These diagrams are referred to as “trees” because they use the 
visual analogy of branches to represent evolutionary lineages 
diXerging oXer tiOe +n tJis teZt trees are usuall[ draYn 
horizontally, as shown above, but the same tree can be drawn 
vertically or diagonally without changing the relationships 
it conveys.
Rotating Around
Branch Points
Rotating the branches of 
a tree around a branch 
point does not change 
what they convey about 
evolutionary relation-
ships. As a result, the 
order in YJicJ taZa 
appear at the branch tips 
is not signiƂcant 9Jat 
matters is the branching 
pattern YJicJ signiƂes 
the order in which the 
lineages have diverged 
from common ancestors.
1.According to this tree, which group 
or groups of organisms are most 
closely related to frogs?
2.Label the part of the diagram that 
represents the most recent common 
ancestor of frogs and humans.
3.How many sister taxa are shown in 
these two trees? Identify them.
5.Redraw the tree above, rotating 
around the green branch point. 
Identify the two closest relatives of 
humans as shown in each of the 
three trees. Explain your answer.
4.Redraw the horizontal tree in Figure 22.2 
as a vertical tree and a diagonal tree.
Vertical tree
Diagonal tree
 Instructors: Additional questions related 
to this Visualizing Figure can be assigned in 
Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   524 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 526 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 525
Applying Phylogenies
Understanding phylogeny can have practical applications. 
Consider maize (corn), which originated in the Americas and 
is now an important food crop worldwide. From a phylogeny 
of maize based on DNA data, researchers have identified two 
species of wild grasses that may be maize’s closest living rela-
tives. These two close relatives may be useful as “reservoirs” 
of beneficial alleles that can be transferred to cultivated maize 
by cross-breeding or genetic engineering.
A different use of phylogenetic trees is to infer species iden-
tities by analyzing the relatedness of DNA sequences from 
different organisms. Researchers have used this approach to 
investigate whether “whale meat” had been harvested illegally 
from whale species protected under international law rather 
than from species that can be harvested legally (Figure 22.6).
evolutionary relationships shown in a tree. For example, in 
Figure 22.5, the evolutionary lineage leading to lizards shares 
an immediate common ancestor with the lineage leading to 
chimpanzees and humans. Thus, we can describe this portion 
of the tree by saying that lizards are the sister taxon to a group 
consisting of chimpanzees and humans.
As also discussed in Figure 22.5, the branches of a tree 
can be rotated around branch points without changing the 
relationships shown in the tree. That is, the order in which 
the taxa appear at the right side of the tree does not repre-
sent a sequence of evolution—in this case, it does not imply a 
sequence leading from fishes to humans.
This tree, like all of the phylogenetic trees in this book, 
is rooted, which means that a branch point within the 
tree (often drawn farthest to the left) represents the most 
recent common ancestor of all taxa in the tree. A lineage 
that diverges from all other members of its group early in 
the history of the group is called a basal taxon. Hence, like 
the fishes in Figure 22.5, a basal taxon lies on one of the two 
branches diverging from the branch point that represents 
the common ancestor of the group. In general, the lineages 
represented by these two branches originated at the same 
point in time and hence have been evolving for the same 
length of time.
What other key points do we need to keep in mind when 
interpreting phylogenetic trees? First, they are intended 
to show patterns of descent, not phenotypic similarity. 
Although closely related organisms often resemble one 
another due to their common ancestry, they may not if their 
lineages have evolved at different rates or faced very differ-
ent environmental conditions. For example, even though 
crocodiles are more closely related to birds than to lizards (see 
Figure 21.17), they look more like lizards because morphol-
ogy has changed dramatically in the bird lineage.
Second, we cannot necessarily infer the ages of the taxa 
or branch points shown in a tree. For example, the tree in 
Figure 22.5 does not indicate that chimpanzees evolved 
before humans. Rather, the tree shows only that chimpan-
zees and humans share a recent common ancestor, but we 
cannot tell when that ancestor lived or when the first chim-
panzees or humans arose. Generally, unless we are given 
specific information about what the branch lengths in a tree 
mean—for example, that they are proportional to time—we 
should interpret the diagram solely in terms of patterns 
of descent. No assumptions should be made about when 
particular species evolved or how much change occurred in 
each lineage.
Third, we should not assume that a taxon on a phyloge-
netic tree evolved from the taxon next to it. Figure 22.5 does 
not indicate that humans evolved from chimpanzees or vice 
versa. We can infer only that the lineage leading to humans 
and the lineage leading to chimpanzees both evolved from 
a recent common ancestor. That ancestor, which is now 
extinct, was neither a human nor a chimpanzee.
Experiment C. S. Baker and S. R. Palumbi purchased 13 
samples of “whale meat” from Japanese fish markets. They 
sequenced part of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from 
each sample and compared their results with the compara-
ble mtDNA sequence from known whale species. To infer the 
species identity of each sample, the team constructed a gene 
tree, a phylogenetic tree that shows patterns of relatedness 
among DNA sequences rather than among taxa.
Results Of the species in the resulting gene tree, only 
Minke whales caught in the Southern Hemisphere can be 
sold legally in Japan.
Conclusion This analysis indicated that mtDNA sequences of 
six of the unknown samples (in red) were most closely related 
to mtDNA sequences of whales that are not legal to harvest.
Data from C. S. Baker and S. R. Palumbi, Which whales are hunted? A molecu-
lar genetic approach to monitoring whaling, Science 265:1538–1539 (1994). 
Reprinted with permission from AAAS.
WHAT IF? What different results would have indicated that all of the 
whale meat had been harvested legally?
. Figure 22.6 Inquiry
What is the species identity of food being sold 
as whale meat?
Minke (Southern 
Hemisphere) mtDNA
Minke (North 
Atlantic) mtDNA
Humpback mtDNA
Blue mtDNA
Fin mtDNA
Unknown mtDNA #9
Unknown mtDNA #1b
Unknown mtDNA #10,
11, 12, 13
Unknown mtDNA #1a,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   525 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 527 ===

526 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
these striking phenotypic differences, the silverswords’ genes 
are very similar. Based on these small molecular divergences, 
scientists estimate that the silversword group began to diverge 
5 million years ago. We’ll discuss how scientists use molecular 
data to estimate such divergence times later in this chapter.
Sorting Homology from Analogy
A potential source of confusion in constructing a phylogeny 
is similarity between organisms that is due to convergent 
evolution—called analogy—rather than to shared ancestry 
(homology). Convergent evolution occurs when similar envi-
ronmental pressures and natural selection produce similar 
(analogous) adaptations in organisms from different evolution-
ary lineages. For example, the two mole-like animals shown in 
Figure 22.7 look very similar. However, their internal anatomy, 
physiology, and reproductive systems are very dissimilar. 
Indeed, genetic and fossil evidence indicate that the common 
ancestor of these animals lived 160 million years ago. This 
common ancestor and most of its descendants were not mole-
like. It appears that analogous characteristics evolved indepen-
dently in these two lineages as they became adapted to similar 
lifestyles—hence, the similar features of these animals should 
not be considered when reconstructing their phylogeny.
Another clue to distinguishing between homology and 
analogy is the complexity of the characters being compared. 
The more elements that are similar in two complex structures, 
the more likely it is that the structures evolved from a com-
mon ancestor. For instance, the skulls of an adult human 
and an adult chimpanzee both consist of many bones fused 
together. The compositions of the skulls match almost per-
fectly, bone for bone. It is highly improbable that such com-
plex structures, matching in so many details, have separate 
origins. More likely, the genes involved in the development 
of both skulls were inherited from a common ancestor.
The same argument applies to comparisons at the gene level. 
Genes are sequences of thousands of nucleotides, each of which 
represents an inherited character in the form of one of the four 
DNA bases: A (adenine), G (guanine), C (cytosine), or T (thymine). 
If genes in two organisms share many portions of their nucleotide 
sequences, it is likely that the genes are homologous.
How do researchers construct phylogenetic trees like those 
we’ve considered here? In the next section, we’ll begin to 
answer that question by examining the data used to deter-
mine phylogenies.
Australian “mole”
African golden mole
c Figure 22.7  
Convergent 
evolution in 
burrowers. A long 
body, large front 
paws, small eyes, 
and a pad of thick 
skin that protects 
the nose all evolved 
independently in 
these species.
CONCEPT CHECK 22.1
1. VISUAL SKILLS Based on the tree in Figure 22.4, are leop-
ards more closely related to badgers or wolves, or are they 
equally related to these two species? Explain.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Which of the trees shown here depicts an 
evolutionary history different from the other two? Explain.
3. DRAW IT The bear family (Ursidae) is more closely related to 
the badger/otter family (Mustelidae) than to the dog family 
(Canidae). Use this information to redraw Figure 22.4.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
A
(a)
B
C
D
B
(b)
D
C
A
D
(c)
C
B
A
CONCEPT 22.2
Phylogenies are inferred from 
morphological and molecular 
data
To infer phylogeny, systematists must gather as much infor-
mation as possible about the morphology, genes, and bio-
chemistry of the relevant organisms. It is important to focus 
on features that result from common ancestry because only 
those features reflect evolutionary relationships.
Morphological and Molecular Homologies
Recall that phenotypic and genetic similarities due to shared 
ancestry are called homologies. For example, the similarity 
in the number and arrangement of bones in the forelimbs of 
mammals is due to their descent from a common ancestor 
with the same bone structure; this is an example of a mor-
phological homology (see Figure 21.15). In the same way, 
genes or other DNA sequences are homologous if they are 
descended from sequences carried by a common ancestor.
In general, organisms that share very similar morphologies 
or similar DNA sequences are likely to be more closely related 
than organisms with vastly different structures or sequences. In 
some cases, however, the morphological divergence between 
related species can be great and their genetic divergence small 
(or vice versa). Consider the Hawaiian silversword plants: 
some of these species are tall, twiggy trees, while others are 
dense, ground-hugging shrubs (see Figure 25.23). But despite 
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   526 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 528 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 527
plants indicates that they are all very closely related, in spite 
of their considerable morphological differences.
Just as with morphological characters, it is necessary to dis-
tinguish homology from analogy in evaluating molecular sim-
ilarities for evolutionary studies. Two sequences that resemble 
each other at many points along their length most likely are 
homologous (see Figure 22.8). But in organisms that do not 
appear to be closely related, the bases that their otherwise very 
different sequences happen to share may simply be coinciden-
tal matches (Figure 22.9). Scientists have developed statistical 
tools that can help distinguish “distant” homologies from 
such coincidental matches in extremely divergent sequences.
Evaluating Molecular Homologies
Comparing DNA molecules often poses technical challenges for 
researchers. The first step after sequencing the DNA is to align 
comparable sequences from the species being studied. If the spe-
cies are very closely related, the sequences probably differ at only 
one or a few sites. In contrast, comparable nucleic acid sequences 
in distantly related species usually have different bases at many 
sites and may have different lengths. This is because insertions 
and deletions accumulate over long periods of time.
Suppose, for example, that certain noncoding DNA 
sequences near a particular gene are very similar in two spe-
cies, except that the first base of the sequence has been deleted 
in one of the species. The effect is that the remaining sequence 
shifts back one notch. A comparison of the two sequences that 
does not take this deletion into account would overlook what 
in fact is a very good match. Computer programs can be used 
to identify such matches by testing possible alignments for 
comparable DNA segments of differing lengths (Figure 22.8).
Such molecular comparisons reveal that many base substi-
tutions and other differences have accumulated in the com-
parable genes of an Australian “mole” and a golden mole. The 
many differences indicate that their lineages have diverged 
greatly since their common ancestor; thus, we say that the 
living species are not closely related. In contrast, the high 
degree of gene sequence similarity among the silversword 
CCATCAGAGTCC
CCATCAGAGTCC
1
2
C
Deletion
Insertion
CATCAGAGTCC
CCAT
GTA
CAGAGTCC
1
2
CCATCAAGTCC
CCATGTACAGAGTCC
1
2
CCAT CA AGTCC
CCATGTACAGAGTCC
1
2
These homologous DNA 
sequences are identical as 
species 1 and species 2 
begin to diverge from their 
common ancestor.
1
Deletion and insertion 
mutations shift what had 
been matching sequences 
in the two species.
2
Of the regions of the 
species 2 sequence that 
match the species 1 
sequence, those shaded 
orange no longer align 
because of these mutations.
3
The matching regions 
realign after a computer 
program adds gaps in 
sequence 1.
4
. Figure 22.8 Aligning segments of DNA. Systematists search 
for similar sequences along DNA segments from two species (only 
one DNA strand is shown for each species). In this example, 11 of 
the original 12 bases have not changed since the species diverged. 
Hence, those portions of the sequences still align once the length is 
adjusted.
ACGGATAGTCCACTAGGCACTA
TCACCGACAGGTCTTTGACTAG
. Figure 22.9 A coincidental match. These two DNA sequences 
from distantly related species coincidentally share 23% of their 
bases (those highlighted in yellow).
WHAT IF? Why might you expect organisms that are not closely related 
to nevertheless share roughly 25% of their bases?
CONCEPT CHECK 22.2
1. Decide whether each of the following pairs of structures 
more likely represents analogy or homology, and explain 
your reasoning: (a) a porcupine’s quills and a cactus’s spines; 
(b) a cat’s paw and a human’s hand; (c) an owl’s wing and a 
hornet’s wing.
2. WHAT IF? Suppose that two species, A and B, have similar 
appearances but very divergent gene sequences, while spe-
cies B and C have very different appearances but similar gene 
sequences. Which pair of species is more likely to be closely 
related: A and B or B and C? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Shared characters are used  
to construct phylogenetic trees
As we’ve discussed, a key step in reconstructing phylogenies 
is to distinguish homologous features from analogous ones 
(since only homology reflects evolutionary history). Next, 
we’ll describe cladistics, a widely used set of methods for 
inferring phylogeny.
Cladistics
In the approach to systematics called cladistics, common 
ancestry is the primary criterion used to classify organisms. 
Using this methodology, biologists attempt to place species 
into groups called clades, each of which includes an ances-
tral species and all of its descendants. Clades, like the catego-
ries of the Linnaean system, are nested within larger clades. In 
CONCEPT 22.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   527 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 529 ===

528 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
an ancestor of the taxon. In contrast, hair is a character shared 
by all mammals but not found in their ancestors. Thus, in mam-
mals, hair is considered a shared derived character, an  
evolutionary novelty unique to a clade.
Figure 22.4, for example, the cat group (Felidae) represents a 
clade within a larger clade (Carnivora) that also includes the 
dog group (Canidae).
A taxon is equivalent to a clade only if it is monophyletic 
(from the Greek, meaning “single tribe”), signifying that 
it consists of an ancestral species and all of its descendants 
(Figure 22.10a). Contrast this with a paraphyletic (“beside 
the tribe”) group, which consists of an ancestral species and 
some, but not all, of its descendants (Figure 22.10b), or a 
polyphyletic (“many tribes”) group, which includes dis-
tantly related species but does not include their most recent 
common ancestor (Figure 22.10c).
Note that in a paraphyletic group, the most recent com-
mon ancestor of all members of the group is part of the group, 
whereas in a polyphyletic group the most recent common 
ancestor is not part of the group. For example, a group consist-
ing of even-toed ungulates (hippopotamuses, deer, and their 
relatives) and their common ancestor is paraphyletic because it 
does not include cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises), 
which descended from that ancestor (Figure 22.11). In contrast, 
a group consisting of seals and cetaceans (based on their simi-
lar body forms) is polyphyletic because it does not include the 
common ancestor of seals and cetaceans. Biologists avoid defin-
ing such polyphyletic groups; if new evidence indicates that an 
existing group is polyphyletic, its members are reclassified.
Shared Ancestral and Shared Derived Characters
As a result of descent with modification, organisms have char-
acters they share with their ancestors, and they also have char-
acters that differ from those of their ancestors. For example, all 
mammals have backbones, but a backbone does not distinguish 
mammals from other vertebrates because all vertebrates have 
backbones. The backbone predates the branching of mammals 
from other vertebrates. Thus for mammals, the backbone is a 
shared ancestral character, a character that originated in 
1 2
3
1
2
3
(a) Monophyletic group (clade) (b) Paraphyletic group (c) Polyphyletic group
Group I, consisting of three species (A, B, C) 
and their common ancestor     , is a monophyletic 
group (clade), meaning that it consists of an 
ancestral species and all of its descendants.
Group III, consisting of four species (A, B, C, 
D), is polyphyletic, meaning that the most 
recent common ancestor of its members is 
not part of the group.
A
C
Group I
D
E
F
G
B
A
C
Group II
D
E
F
G
B
A
C
D
E
F
G
B
Group III
Group II is paraphyletic, meaning that it 
consists of an ancestral species      and some 
of its descendants (species D, E, F) but not all
of them (does not include species G). 
. Figure 22.10 Monophyletic, paraphyletic, and polyphyletic groups.
DRAW IT Circle the branch point that represents the most recent 
common ancestor of cetaceans and seals. Explain why that ancestor 
would not be part of a cetacean–seal group defined by similar body form.
Other even-toed
ungulates
Hippopotamuses
Cetaceans
Bears
Other
carnivores
Seals
Common
ancestor of 
even-toed 
ungulates
This group is paraphyletic because it does 
not include all the descendants of the 
common ancestor (it excludes cetaceans).
This group is polyphyletic because it 
does not include the most recent 
common ancestor of its members.
. Figure 22.11 Paraphyletic versus polyphyletic groups.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   528 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 530 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 529
in the ingroup. Thus, for a character that only occurs in a sub-
set of the ingroup, we’ll assume that the character arose in the 
lineage leading to those members of the ingroup.
By comparing members of the ingroup with each other 
and with the outgroup, we can determine which characters 
were derived at the various branch points of vertebrate evo-
lution. In our example, all of the vertebrates in the ingroup 
have backbones: This character was present in the ancestral 
vertebrate, but not in the outgroup. Now note that hinged 
jaws are absent in the outgroup and in lampreys, but pres-
ent in all other members of the ingroup. This indicates that 
hinged jaws arose in a lineage leading to all members of 
the ingroup except lampreys. Hence, we can conclude that 
lampreys are the sister taxon to the other vertebrates in the 
ingroup. Proceeding in this way, we can translate the data in 
our table of characters into a phylogenetic tree that places all 
the ingroup taxa into a hierarchy based on their derived char-
acters (Figure 22.12b).
Phylogenetic Trees with Proportional 
Branch Lengths
In the phylogenetic trees we have presented so far, the 
lengths of the tree’s branches do not indicate the degree of 
evolutionary change in each lineage. Furthermore, the chro-
nology represented by the branching pattern of the tree is 
relative (earlier versus later) rather than absolute (how many 
millions of years ago). But in some tree diagrams, branch 
lengths are proportional to the amount of evolutionary 
change or to the times at which particular events occurred.
Note that a shared derived character can refer to the loss of 
a feature, such as the loss of limbs in snakes or whales. Also, 
keep in mind that it is a relative matter whether a character is 
considered ancestral or derived. A backbone can also qualify 
as a shared derived character, but only at a deeper branch 
point that distinguishes all vertebrates from other animals.
Inferring Phylogenies Using Derived Characters
Shared derived characters are unique to particular clades. 
Because all features of organisms arose at some point in the 
history of life, it should be possible to determine the clade in 
which each shared derived character first appeared and to use 
that information to infer evolutionary relationships.
To give an example of this approach, consider the 
set of characters shown in Figure 22.12a for each of five 
vertebrates—a leopard, turtle, frog, bass, and lamprey (a jaw-
less aquatic vertebrate). As a basis of comparison, we need 
to select an outgroup. An outgroup is a species or group of 
species from an evolutionary lineage that is closely related to 
but not part of the group of species that we are studying (the 
ingroup). A suitable outgroup can be determined based on 
evidence from morphology, paleontology, embryonic devel-
opment, and gene sequences. An appropriate outgroup for 
our example is the lancelet, a small animal that lives in mud-
flats and (like vertebrates) is a member of the more inclusive 
group called the chordates. Unlike the vertebrates, however, 
the lancelet does not have a backbone.
In our analysis, a character found in both the outgroup 
and the ingroup is assumed to be ancestral. We’ll also assume 
that each derived character in Figure 22.12a arose only once 
DRAW IT In (b), circle the most inclusive clade for which a hinged jaw is a shared 
ancestral character.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
0 Hair
TAXA
Amnion
CHARACTERS
Lancelet
(outgroup)
Lamprey
Bass
Frog
Turtle
Leopard
Four limbs
Hinged jaws
00001
000011
000111
001111
Vertebral column
(backbone)011111
(a) (b)Character table. A 0 indicates that a character is absent; a 1 
indicates that a character is present.
Lancelet 
(outgroup)
Lamprey
Bass
Frog
Turtle
Leopard
Phylogenetic tree. The character table in (a) leads us to infer the 
phylogenetic relationships shown in this tree.
Vertebral
column
Hinged jaws
Four limbs
Amnion
Hair
. Figure 22.12 Using derived characters to infer phylogeny. The derived characters used here 
include the amnion, a membrane that encloses the embryo inside a fluid-filled sac (see Figure 34.26). 
Note that a different set of characters could lead us to infer a different phylogenetic tree.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   529 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 531 ===

530 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
In Figure 22.13, for example, each branch length of the 
phylogenetic tree reflects the number of changes that have 
taken place in a particular DNA sequence in that lineage. 
Note that the total length of the horizontal lines from the 
base of the tree to the mouse is less than that of the line 
leading to the fruit fly, Drosophila. This indicates that fewer 
genetic changes have occurred in the mouse lineage than in 
the Drosophila lineage. In addition, because the mouse and fly 
lineages have evolved for an equal amount of time after they 
diverged from a common ancestor, the rate of change was 
lower in mouse lineage than in the Drosophila lineage.
In general, although the branches of a phylogenetic tree 
may have different lengths, among organisms alive today, 
all the different lineages that descend from a common ances-
tor have survived for the same number of years. To take an 
extreme example, humans and bacteria had a common ances-
tor that lived over 3 billion years ago. Fossils and genetic 
evidence indicate that this ancestor was a single-celled pro-
karyote. Even though bacteria have apparently changed little 
in their morphology since that common ancestor, there have 
nonetheless been 3 billion years of evolution in the bacterial 
lineage, just as there have been 3 billion years of evolution in 
the lineage that ultimately gave rise to humans.
These equal spans of chronological time can be repre-
sented in a phylogenetic tree whose branch lengths are pro-
portional to time (Figure 22.14). Such a tree draws on fossil 
data to place branch points in the context of geologic time. 
Additionally, it is possible to combine these two types of trees 
by labeling branch points with information about rates of 
genetic change or dates of divergence.
Maximum Parsimony and 
Maximum Likelihood
As the database of DNA sequences that 
enables us to study more species grows, 
the difficulty of building the phyloge-
netic tree that best describes their evolu-
tionary history also grows. What if you 
are analyzing data for 50 species? There are 
3*1076 different ways to arrange 50 species 
into a tree! And which tree in this huge forest 
reflects the true phylogeny? Systematists can 
never be sure of finding the most accurate tree in 
such a large data set, but they can narrow the pos-
sibilities by applying the principles of maximum 
parsimony and maximum likelihood.
According to the principle of maximum parsimony, 
we should first investigate the simplest explanation that 
is consistent with the facts. (The parsimony principle is 
also called “Occam’s razor” after William of Occam, a 
14th-century English philosopher who advocated solving 
problems by “shaving away” unnecessary complications.) 
In the case of trees based on morphology, the most 
parsimonious tree requires the fewest evolutionary events, 
as measured by the origin of shared derived morphological 
. Figure 22.14 Branch lengths can indicate time. This tree is 
based on the same DNA data as that in Figure 22.13, but here the 
branch points are dated based on fossil evidence. Thus, the branch 
lengths are proportional to time. Each lineage has the same total 
length from the base of the tree to the branch tip, indicating that 
all the lineages have diverged from the common ancestor for equal 
amounts of time.
500 400600 300 200 100
Millions of years ago
Present
Drosophila
Lancelet
Zebrafish
Frog
Chicken
Human
Mouse
Drosophila
Lancelet
Zebrafish
Frog
Chicken
Human
Mouse
m Figure 22.13 Branch  
lengths can represent genetic  
change. This tree was based on 
sequences of homologs of a gene that 
plays a role in development; Drosophila was used 
as an outgroup. Branch lengths are proportional to the amount 
of genetic change in each lineage; varying branch lengths indicate 
that the gene has evolved at different rates in different lineages.
INTERPRET THE DATA In which vertebrate lineage has the 
studied gene evolved most rapidly? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   530 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 532 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 531
characters. For phylogenies based on DNA, the most 
parsimonious tree requires the fewest base changes.
A maximum likelihood approach identifies the tree 
most likely to have produced a given set of DNA data based 
on certain probability rules about how DNA sequences 
change over time. For example, the underlying probability 
rules could be based on the assumption that all nucleotide 
substitutions are equally likely. If evidence suggests that 
this assumption is not correct, more complex rules could 
be devised to account for different rates of change among 
different nucleotides or at different positions in a gene.
Scientists have developed many computer programs to 
search for trees that are parsimonious and likely. When a 
large amount of accurate data is available, the methods used 
in these programs usually yield similar trees. As an example 
of one method, Figure 22.15 walks you through the pro-
cess of identifying the most parsimonious molecular tree 
for a three-species problem. Computer programs use the 
. Figure 22.15 Research Method
Applying Parsimony to a Problem in Molecular Systematics
Application In considering possible phylogenies for a group of species, systematists compare molecular data 
 for the species. An efficient way to begin is by identifying the most parsimonious hypothesis—the one that  
requires the fewest evolutionary events (molecular changes) to have occurred.
Species I
Three phylogenetic hypotheses:
Site
1234
CSpecies I TAT
CSpecies II TTC
ASpecies III
Ancestral sequence
GAC
AGT T
I
II
III
I
III
II
III
II
I
Species II Species III
I
II
III
I
III
II
III
II
I
I
II
III
I
III
II
III
II
I
1/C
1/C
1/C 1/C
1/C
I
II
III
I
III
II
III
II
I
3/A
4/C
2/T
2/T 3/A
2/T
3/A
4/C
2/T 4/C
3/A
2/T
4/C
3/A 4/C
7 events6 events 7 events
Technique Follow the numbered steps as we apply the 
principle of parsimony to a hypothetical phylogenetic 
problem involving three closely related beetle species.
1  First, draw the three possible trees for the species. 
(Although only three trees are possible when ordering 
three species, the number of possible trees increases rapidly 
with the number of species: There are 15 trees for four 
species and 34,459,425 trees for 10 species.)
2  Tabulate the molecular data for the species. In this 
simplified example, the data represent a DNA sequence 
consisting of just four nucleotide bases. Data from sev-
eral outgroup species (not shown) were used to infer the 
ancestral DNA sequence.
3  Now focus on site 1 in the DNA sequence. In the tree on the 
left, a single base-change event, represented by the purple 
hatch mark on the branch leading to species I and II (and 
labeled 1/C, indicating a change at site 1 to nucleotide C), 
is sufficient to account for the site 1 data. In the other two 
trees, two base-change events are necessary.
4  Continuing the comparison of bases at sites 2, 3, and 4 
reveals that each of the three trees requires a total of five 
additional base-change events (purple hatch marks).
Results To identify the most parsimonious tree, we total 
all of the base-change events noted in steps 3 and 4. We 
conclude that the first tree is the most parsimonious of the 
three possible phylogenies. (In a real example, many more 
sites would be analyzed. Hence, the trees would often differ 
by more than one base-change event.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   531 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 533 ===

532 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
their eggs with their neck. Reasoning that any feature shared 
by birds and crocodiles is likely to have been present in their 
common ancestor (denoted by the blue dot in Figure 22.16) 
and all of its descendants, biologists predicted that dinosaurs 
had four-chambered hearts, sang, built nests, and cared for 
their eggs.
Internal organs, such as the heart, rarely fossilize, and 
it is, of course, difficult to test whether dinosaurs sang 
to defend territories and attract mates. However, fossil 
discoveries have supported the prediction that dinosaurs 
built nests and cared for their eggs. First, a fossil embryo of 
an Oviraptor dinosaur was found, still inside its egg. This 
egg was identical to those found in another fossil, one 
that showed an Oviraptor crouching over a group of eggs 
in a posture similar to how birds sit on their nests today 
(Figure 22.17). Researchers suggested that the Oviraptor 
dinosaur preserved in this second fossil died while incu-
bating or protecting its eggs. The broader conclusion 
that emerged from this work—that dinosaurs built nests 
and cared for their eggs—has since been strengthened by 
additional fossil discoveries that show that other species 
principle of parsimony to estimate phylogenies in a similar 
way: They examine large numbers of possible trees and 
identify those that require the fewest evolutionary changes.
Phylogenetic Trees as Hypotheses
This is a good place to reiterate that any phylogenetic tree 
represents a hypothesis about how the organisms in the tree 
are related to one another. The best hypothesis is the one 
that best fits all the available data. A phylogenetic hypothesis 
may be modified when new evidence compels systematists 
to revise their trees. Indeed, while many older phylogenetic 
hypotheses have been supported by new morphological and 
molecular data, others have been changed or rejected.
Thinking of phylogenies as hypotheses also allows us to 
use them in a powerful way: We can make and test predic-
tions based on the assumption that a particular phylogeny—
our hypothesis—is correct. For example, in an approach 
known as phylogenetic bracketing, we can predict (by parsi-
mony) that features shared by two groups of closely related 
organisms are present in their common ancestor and all of 
its descendants unless independent data indicate otherwise. 
(Note that “prediction” can refer to unknown past events as 
well as to evolutionary changes yet to occur.)
This approach has been used to make novel predictions 
about dinosaurs. For example, there is evidence that birds 
descended from the theropods, a group of bipedal dinosaurs. 
As seen in Figure 22.16, the closest living relatives of birds 
are crocodiles. Birds and crocodiles share numerous features: 
They have four-chambered hearts, they “sing” to defend 
territories and attract mates (although a crocodile’s “song” 
is more like a bellow), and they build nests. Both birds and 
crocodiles also care for their eggs by warming them. Birds 
warm their eggs by sitting on them, whereas crocodiles cover 
Lizards
and snakes
Crocodilians
Other
dinosaurs
†
†Theropod
dinosaurs
other than birds
Common
ancestor of
crocodilians,
dinosaurs,
and birds
Birds
. Figure 22.16 A phylogenetic tree of birds and their close 
relatives. (A dagger, †, indicates extinct lineages.)
VISUAL SKILLS In this tree diagram, what is the sister taxon of the 
clade that includes dinosaurs and their most recent common ancestor? 
Explain.
Front limb
Hind limb
(a)Eggs Fossil remains of 
Oviraptor and eggs. 
The orientation of the 
bones, which surround 
and cover the eggs, 
suggests that the 
dinosaur died while 
incubating or protecting 
its eggs.
(b)Artist’s reconstruction of the dinosaur’s posture on its 
nest based on the fossil findings.
. Figure 22.17 Fossil support for a phylogenetic prediction: 
Dinosaurs built nests and cared for their eggs.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   532 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 534 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 533
of dinosaurs built nests and sat on their eggs. Finally, by 
supporting predictions based on the phylogenetic hypoth-
esis shown in Figure 22.16, fossil discoveries of nests and 
parental care in dinosaurs provide independent data that 
suggest that the hypothesis is correct.
Different genes can evolve at different rates, even in the 
same evolutionary lineage. As a result, molecular trees can 
represent short or long periods of time, depending on which 
genes are used. For example, the DNA that codes for ribosomal 
RNA (rRNA) changes relatively slowly. Therefore, comparisons 
of DNA sequences in these genes are useful for investigating 
relationships between taxa that diverged hundreds of millions 
of years ago. Studies of rRNA sequences indicate, for instance, 
that fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants. 
In contrast, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) evolves relatively 
rapidly and can be used to explore recent evolutionary 
events. One research team has traced the relationships among 
Native American groups through their mtDNA sequences. 
The molecular findings corroborate other evidence that the 
Pima of Arizona, the Maya of Mexico, and the Yanomami of 
Venezuela are closely related, probably descending from the 
first of three waves of immigrants that crossed the Bering Land 
Bridge from Asia to the Americas about 15,000 years ago.
Gene Duplications and Gene Families
What do molecular data reveal about the evolutionary history 
of genome change? Consider gene duplication, which can 
play an important role in evolution because it increases the 
number of genes in the genome, providing more opportuni-
ties for further evolutionary changes. Molecular techniques 
now allow us to trace the phylogenies of gene duplications. 
These molecular phylogenies must account for repeated 
duplications that have resulted in gene families, groups of 
related genes within an organism’s genome (see Figure 20.10).
Accounting for such duplications leads us to distinguish two 
types of homologous genes (Figure 22.18): orthologous genes 
and paralogous genes. In orthologous genes from the Greek 
orthos, exact), the homology is the result of a speciation event 
Ancestral gene Ancestral gene
Species CAncestral species
Speciation with
divergence of gene
Gene duplication and divergence
Paralogous genesOrthologous genes
Species A Species C after many generationsSpecies B
(a) Formation of orthologous genes: a product of speciation (b) Formation of paralogous genes: within a species
. Figure 22.18 Two types of homologous genes. Colored bands mark regions 
of the genes where differences in base sequences have accumulated.
CONCEPT CHECK 22.3
1. To distinguish a particular clade of mammals within the 
larger clade that corresponds to class Mammalia, would hair 
be a useful character? Why or why not?
2. The most parsimonious tree of evolutionary relationships 
can be inaccurate. How can this occur?
3. WHAT IF? Draw a phylogenetic tree that includes the rela-
tionships from Figure 25.7 and Figure 22.16. Traditionally, all 
the taxa shown besides birds and mammals were classified 
as reptiles. Would a cladistic approach support that classifica-
tion? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 22.4
An organism’s evolutionary history 
is documented in its genome
As you have seen in this chapter, comparisons of nucleic acids 
or other molecules can be used to deduce relatedness. In some 
cases, such comparisons can reveal phylogenetic relation-
ships that cannot be determined by nonmolecular methods 
such as comparative anatomy. For example, the analysis of 
molecular data helps us uncover evolutionary relationships 
between groups that have little common ground for morpho-
logical comparison, such as animals and fungi. And molecu-
lar methods allow us to reconstruct phylogenies among 
groups of present-day organisms for which the fossil record is 
poor or lacking entirely.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   533 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 535 ===

534 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
1. Explain how comparing proteins of two species can yield 
data about the species’ evolutionary relationship.
2. Distinguish orthologous from paralogous genes. Which of 
these two types of genes should be used to infer phylog-
eny? Explain your answer.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 18.12, then suggest 
how a particular gene could have different functions in dif-
ferent tissues within an organism.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
and hence occurs between genes found in different species 
(see Figure 22.18a). For example, the genes that code for cyto-
chrome c (a protein that functions in electron transport chains) 
in humans and dogs are orthologous. In paralogous genes 
(from the Greek para, in parallel), the homology results from 
gene duplication; hence, multiple copies of these genes have 
diverged from one another within a species (see Figure 22.18b). 
In Concept 23.1, you encountered the example of olfactory 
receptor genes, which have undergone many gene duplications 
in vertebrates; humans have 380 functional copies of these 
paralogous genes, while mice have 1,200.
Note that orthologous genes can only diverge after specia-
tion has taken place, that is, after the genes are found in sepa-
rate gene pools. Thus, differences among orthologous genes 
reflect the history of speciation events, making them well-
suited for inferring phylogeny. For example, although the 
cytochrome c genes in humans and dogs serve the same func-
tion, the gene’s sequence in humans has diverged from that 
in dogs in the time since these species last shared a common 
ancestor. Paralogous genes, on the other hand, can diverge 
within a species because they are present in more than one 
copy in the genome. The paralogous genes that make up the 
olfactory receptor gene family in humans have diverged from 
each other during our long evolutionary history. They now 
specify proteins that confer sensitivity to a wide variety of 
molecules, ranging from food odors to sex pheromones.
Genome Evolution
Now that we can compare the entire genomes of different 
organisms, including our own, two patterns have emerged. 
First, lineages that diverged long ago often share many 
orthologous genes. For example, though the human and 
mouse lineages diverged about 65 million years ago, 99% of 
the genes of humans and mice are orthologous. And 50% of 
human genes are orthologous with those of yeast, despite 
1 billion years of divergent evolution. Such commonalities 
explain why disparate organisms nevertheless share many 
biochemical and developmental pathways. As a result of 
these shared pathways, the functioning of genes linked to dis-
eases in humans can often be investigated by studying yeast 
and other organisms distantly related to humans.
Second, the number of genes a species has doesn’t seem 
to increase through duplication at the same rate as perceived 
phenotypic complexity. Humans have only about four 
times as many genes as yeast, a single-celled eukaryote, even 
though—unlike yeast—we have a large, complex brain and a 
body with more than 200 different types of tissues. Evidence 
is emerging that many human genes are more versatile than 
those of yeast: A single human gene can encode multiple 
proteins that perform different tasks in various body tissues. 
Unraveling the mechanisms that cause this genomic versatil-
ity and phenotypic variation is an exciting challenge.
CONCEPT CHECK 22.4
CONCEPT 22.5
Molecular clocks help track 
evolutionary time
One goal of evolutionary biology is to understand the rela-
tionships among all organisms. It is also helpful to know 
when lineages diverged from one another, including those 
for which there is no fossil record. But how can we deter-
mine the timing of phylogenies that extend beyond the 
fossil record?
Molecular Clocks
We stated earlier that researchers have estimated that the 
common ancestor of Hawaiian silversword plants lived about 
5 million years ago. How did they make this estimate? They 
relied on the concept of a molecular clock, an approach 
for measuring the absolute time of evolutionary change 
based on the observation that some genes and other regions 
of genomes appear to evolve at constant rates. An assump-
tion underlying the molecular clock is that the number of 
nucleotide substitutions in orthologous genes is proportional 
to the time that has elapsed since the genes branched from 
their common ancestor. In the case of paralogous genes, the 
number of substitutions is proportional to the time since the 
ancestral gene was duplicated.
We can calibrate the molecular clock of a gene that has a 
reliable average rate of evolution by graphing the number 
of genetic differences—for example, nucleotide, codon, 
or amino acid differences—against the dates of evolution-
ary branch points that are known from the fossil record 
(Figure 22.19). The average rates of genetic change inferred 
from such graphs can then be used to estimate the dates of 
events that cannot be discerned from the fossil record, such 
as the origin of the silverswords discussed earlier.
Of course, no gene marks time with complete precision. In 
fact, some portions of the genome appear to have evolved in 
irregular bursts that are not at all clocklike. And even those 
genes that seem to act as reliable molecular clocks are accurate 
only in the statistical sense of showing a fairly smooth average 
rate of change. Over time, there may still be deviations from 
that average rate. Furthermore, the same gene may evolve at 
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   534 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 536 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 535
selection may change repeatedly over long periods of time 
(and hence may average out), some genes experiencing 
selection can nevertheless serve as approximate markers of 
elapsed time.
Another question arises when researchers attempt to 
extend molecular clocks beyond the time span documented 
by the fossil record. Although an abundant fossil record 
extends back only about 550 million years, molecular 
clocks have been used to date evolutionary divergences that 
occurred a billion or more years ago. These estimates assume 
that the clocks have been constant for all that time. Such esti-
mates are highly uncertain.
In some cases, problems may be avoided by calibrating 
molecular clocks with data on the rates at which genes have 
evolved in different taxa. In other cases, problems may be 
avoided by using many genes rather than just using one or a 
few genes. By using many genes, fluctuations in evolutionary 
rate due to natural selection or other factors that vary over 
time may average out. For example, one group of researchers 
constructed molecular clocks of vertebrate evolution from 
published sequence data for 658 nuclear genes. Despite the 
broad period of time covered (nearly 600 million years) and 
the fact that natural selection probably affected some of these 
genes, their estimates of divergence times agreed closely with 
fossil-based estimates. As this example suggests, if used with 
care, molecular clocks can aid our understanding of evolu-
tionary relationships.
Applying a Molecular Clock:  
Dating the Origin of HIV
Researchers have used a molecular clock to date the origin 
of HIV infection in humans. Phylogenetic analysis shows 
that HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is descended from 
viruses that infect chimpanzees and other primates. (Most 
of these viruses do not cause AIDS-like diseases in their 
native hosts.) When did HIV jump to humans? There is 
no simple answer because the virus has spread to humans 
more than once. The multiple origins of HIV are reflected 
in the variety of strains (genetic types) of the virus. HIV’s 
genetic material is made of RNA, and like other RNA 
viruses, it evolves quickly.
The most widespread strain in humans is HIV-1 M. To 
pinpoint the earliest HIV-1 M infection, researchers com-
pared samples of the virus from various times during the epi-
demic, including a sample from 1959. Comparisons of gene 
sequences showed that the virus has evolved in a clocklike 
fashion. Extrapolating backward in time using the molecular 
clock indicates that the HIV-1 M strain first spread to humans 
around 1930 (Figure 22.20). A later study, which dated 
the origin of HIV using a more advanced molecular clock 
approach than that covered in this book, estimated that the 
HIV-1 M strain first spread to humans around 1910.
different rates in different groups of organisms. Finally, when 
comparing genes that are clocklike, the rate of the clock may 
vary greatly from one gene to another; some genes evolve a 
million times faster than others.
Differences in Clock Speed
What causes such differences in the speed at which clock-
like genes evolve? The answer stems from the fact that some 
mutations are selectively neutral—neither beneficial nor 
detrimental. Of course, many new mutations are harmful 
and are removed quickly by selection. But if most of the rest 
are neutral and have little or no effect on fitness, then the 
rate of evolution of those neutral mutations should indeed 
be regular, like a clock. Differences in the clock rate for differ-
ent genes are related to how important a gene is. If the exact 
sequence of amino acids that a gene specifies is essential to 
survival, most of the mutational changes will be harmful and 
only a few will be neutral. As a result, such genes change only 
slowly. But if the exact sequence of amino acids is less critical, 
fewer of the new mutations will be harmful and more will be 
neutral. Such genes change more quickly.
Potential Problems with Molecular Clocks
As we’ve seen, molecular clocks do not run as smoothly as 
would be expected if the underlying mutations were selec-
tively neutral. Many irregularities are likely to be the result of 
natural selection in which certain DNA changes are favored 
over others. Indeed, evidence suggests that almost half the 
amino acid differences in proteins of two Drosophila species, 
D. simulans and D. yakuba, are not neutral but have resulted 
from natural selection. But because the direction of natural 
INTERPRET THE DATA Use the graph to estimate the divergence 
time for a mammal with a total of 30 mutations in the seven proteins.
Number of mutations
Divergence time (millions of years)
0 30 60 90 120
90
60
30
0
. Figure 22.19 A molecular clock for mammals. The number of 
accumulated mutations in seven well-studied proteins has increased 
over time in a consistent manner for most mammal species. The three 
green data points represent primate species, whose proteins appear 
to have evolved more slowly than those of other mammals. The 
divergence time for each data point was based on fossil evidence.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   535 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 537 ===

536 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
1960s, when many biologists recognized five kingdoms: 
Monera (prokaryotes), Protista (a diverse kingdom consist-
ing mostly of unicellular organisms), Plantae, Fungi, and 
Animalia. This system highlighted the two fundamentally 
different types of cells, prokaryotic and eukaryotic, and set 
the prokaryotes apart from all eukaryotes by placing them in 
their own kingdom, Monera.
However, phylogenies based on genetic data soon revealed 
a problem with this system: Some prokaryotes differ as much 
from each other as they do from eukaryotes. Such difficulties led 
biologists to adopt a three-domain system. The three domains—
Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—are a classification level higher 
than the kingdom level. The validity of these domains has been 
supported by many studies, including a recent study that ana-
lyzed nearly 100 completely sequenced genomes.
The domain Bacteria contains most of the currently 
known prokaryotes, while the domain Archaea consists of a 
diverse group of prokaryotic organisms that inhabit a wide 
variety of environments. The domain Eukarya consists of all 
the organisms that have cells containing true nuclei. This 
domain includes many groups of single-celled organisms as 
well as multicellular plants, fungi, and animals. Figure 22.21  
represents one possible phylogenetic tree for the three 
domains and some of the many lineages they encompass.
The three-domain system highlights the fact that much 
of the history of life has been about single-celled organisms. 
The two prokaryotic domains consist entirely of single-celled 
organisms, and even in Eukarya, only the branches labeled in 
red type (plants, fungi, and animals) are dominated by multi-
cellular organisms. Of the five kingdoms previously recognized 
by systematists, most biologists continue to recognize Plantae, 
Fungi, and Animalia, but not Monera and Protista. The king-
dom Monera is obsolete because it would have members in two 
different domains. The kingdom Protista has also crumbled 
because it includes members that are more closely related to 
plants, fungi, or animals than to other protists (see Figure 28.5).
New research continues to change our understanding of 
the tree of life. For example, recent metagenomic studies have 
uncovered the genomes of many new species of archaea, lead-
ing to discovery of the Thaumarchaeota and other previously 
unknown phyla of archaea. One of these newly discovered 
groups, the lokiarcheaota, may represent the long-sought-
after sister group of the eukaryotes. If confirmed, this discov-
ery could help shed light on how eukaryotes arose from their 
prokaryotic ancestors (see Concepts 27.4 and 28.1).
The Important Role of Horizontal  
Gene Transfer
In the phylogeny shown in Figure 22.21, the first major 
split in the history of life occurred when bacteria diverged 
from other organisms. If this tree is correct, eukaryotes and 
archaea are more closely related to each other than either is 
to bacteria.
1. What is a molecular clock? What assumption underlies the 
use of a molecular clock?
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Concept 17.5. Then explain 
how numerous base changes could occur in an organism’s 
DNA yet have no effect on its fitness.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
0.20
Index of base changes between HIV gene sequences
0.15
0.10
Range
HIV
0.05
0
1920 1940 1960 1980 20001900
Year
Adjusted best-fit line 
(accounts for uncertain 
dates of HIV sequences)
. Figure 22.20 Dating the origin of HIV-1 M. The black data 
points are based on DNA sequences of an HIV gene in patients’ 
blood samples. (The dates when these individual HIV gene 
sequences arose are not certain because a person can harbor the 
virus for years before symptoms occur.) Projecting the gene’s rate 
of change backward in time by this method suggests that the virus 
originated in the 1930s.
CONCEPT 22.6
CONCEPT CHECK 22.5
Our understanding of the tree  
of life continues to change based 
on new data
The discovery that the glass lizard in Figure 22.1 evolved 
from a different lineage of legless lizards than did snakes is 
one example of how our understanding of life’s diversity is 
informed by systematics. Indeed, in recent decades, system-
atists have gained insight into even the very deepest branches 
of the tree of life by analyzing DNA sequence data.
From Two Kingdoms to Three Domains
Biologists once classified all known species into two king-
doms: plants and animals. Classification schemes with more 
than two kingdoms gained broad acceptance in the late 
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   536 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 538 ===

 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 537
a process in which genes are transferred from one genome to 
another through mechanisms such as exchange of transpos-
able elements and plasmids, viral infection (see Concept 26.2), 
and fusions of organisms (as when a host and its endosymbiont 
become a single organism). Recent research reinforces the view 
that horizontal gene transfer is important. For example, one 
study found that on average, 80% of the genes in 181 prokary-
otic genomes had moved between species at some point during 
the course of evolution. Because phylogenetic trees are based on 
the assumption that genes are passed vertically from one gen-
eration to the next, the occurrence of such horizontal transfer 
events helps to explain why trees built using different genes can 
give inconsistent results.
Horizontal gene transfer can also occur between eukary-
otes. For example, over 200 cases of the horizontal transfer 
of transposons have been reported in eukaryotes, includ-
ing humans and other primates, plants, birds, and lizards. 
Nuclear genes have also been transferred horizontally from 
one eukaryote to another. The Scientific Skills Exercise 
describes one such example, giving you the opportunity to 
interpret data on the transfer of a pigment gene to an aphid 
from another species.
Studies show that eukaryotes can even acquire genes by 
horizontal gene transfer from prokaryotes. For example, 
a recent genomic analysis showed that the alga Galdieria 
sulphuraria (Figure 22.22) acquired about 5% of its nuclear 
genes from various bacterial and archaeal species. Unlike 
most eukaryotes, this alga can survive in environments that 
are highly acidic or extremely hot, as well as those with high 
concentrations of heavy metals. The researchers identified 
specific genes transferred from prokaryotes that have enabled 
G. sulphuraria to thrive in such extreme habitats.
Overall, horizontal gene transfer has played a key role 
throughout the evolutionary history of life, and it continues 
to occur today. Some biologists have argued that horizontal 
gene transfer was so common that the early history of life 
should be represented not as a dichotomously branching tree 
like that in Figure 22.21, but rather as a tangled network of  
5 om
. Figure 22.22 A recipient of transferred genes: the 
alga Galdieria sulphuraria. Genes received from prokaryotes 
enable G. sulphuraria (inset) to grow in extreme 
environments, including on sulfur-encrusted 
rocks around volcanic hot springs similar to 
this one in Yellowstone National Park.
MAKE CONNECTIONS After reviewing endosymbiont theory (see 
Figure 7.16), explain the specific positions of the mitochondrion and 
chloroplast lineages on this tree.
Forams
Euglenozoans
Diatoms
Ciliates
Red algae
Green algae
Plants
Tubulinids
Fungi
Animals
Euryarcheotes
Thaumarchaeotes
Crenarcheotes
Proteobacteria
(Mitochondria)*
Chlamydias
Spirochetes
Gram-positive
bacteria
Cyanobacteria
(Chloroplasts)*
COMMON
ANCESTOR
OF ALL LIFE
Domain Bacteria Domain EukaryaDomain
Archaea
Note: A branch 
point leading to 
multiple lineages is 
called a polytomy, 
an unresolved 
pattern of 
divergence.
. Figure 22.21 The three domains of life. This phylogenetic tree 
is based on sequence data for rRNA and other genes. For simplicity, 
only some of the major branches in each domain are shown. Lineages 
within Eukarya that are dominated by multicellular organisms (plants, 
fungi, and animals) are in red type, while the two lineages denoted 
by an asterisk are based on DNA from cellular organelles. All other 
lineages consist solely or mainly of single-celled organisms.
This reconstruction of the tree of life is based in part on 
sequence comparisons of rRNA genes, which code for the RNA 
components of ribosomes. However, some other genes reveal 
a different set of relationships. For example, researchers have 
found that many of the genes that influence metabolism in yeast 
(a unicellular eukaryote) are more similar to genes in the domain 
Bacteria than they are to genes in the domain Archaea—a find-
ing that suggests that the eukaryotes may share a more recent 
common ancestor with bacteria than with archaea.
What causes trees based on data from different genes to  
yield such different results? Comparisons of complete genomes  
from the three domains show that there have been substan-
tial movements of genes between organisms in the different 
domains. These took place through horizontal gene transfer, 
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   537 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 539 ===

538 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Using Protein Sequence Data to Test  
an Evolutionary Hypothesis
Did Aphids Acquire Their Ability to Make Carotenoids 
Through Horizontal Gene Transfer? Carotenoids are colored 
molecules that have diverse functions in many organisms, such as 
photosynthesis in plants and light detection in animals. Plants and 
many microorganisms can synthesize carotenoids from scratch, but 
animals generally cannot (they must obtain carotenoids from their 
diet). One exception is the pea aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum, a small, 
plant-dwelling insect whose genome includes a full set of genes 
for the enzymes needed to make carotenoids. Because other 
animals lack these genes, it is unlikely that aphids inherited them 
from a single-celled common ancestor shared with microorgan-
isms and plants. So where did they come from? Evolutionary biolo-
gists hypothesized that an aphid ancestor acquired these genes by 
horizontal gene transfer from distantly related organisms.
How the Experiment Was Done Scientists obtained the DNA 
sequences for the carotenoid-biosynthesis genes from several 
species, including aphids, fungi, bacteria, and plants. A computer 
“translated” these sequences into amino acid sequences of the 
encoded polypeptides and aligned the amino acid sequences. 
This allowed the team to compare the corresponding polypep-
tides in the different organisms.
Data from the Experiment The sequences below show the 
first 60 amino acids of one polypeptide of the carotenoid-
biosynthesis enzymes in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (bottom) 
and the corresponding amino acids in five nonplant species, 
using the one-letter abbre-
viations for the amino acids 
(see Figure 5.14). A dash 
(–) indicates a gap inserted 
in a sequence to optimize 
its alignment with the cor-
responding sequence in 
Arabidopsis.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. In the rows of data for the organisms being compared with 
the aphid, highlight the amino acids that are identical to the 
corresponding amino acids in the aphid.
2. Which organism has the most amino acids in common with the 
aphid? Rank the partial polypeptides from the other four organ-
isms in degree of similarity to that of the aphid.
3. (a) Do these data support the hypothesis that aphids acquired 
the gene for this polypeptide by horizontal gene transfer? Why 
or why not? (b) If horizontal gene transfer did occur, what type 
of organism is likely to have been the source?
4. What additional sequence data would support your hypothesis?
5. How would you account for the similarities between the aphid 
sequence and the sequences for the bacteria and plant?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Data from Nancy A. Moran, Yale University. See N. A. Moran and T. Jarvik, Lateral 
transfer of genes from fungi underlies carotenoid production in aphids, Science 
328:624–627 (2010).
Scientific Skills Exercise
Organism Alignment of Amino Acid Sequences
Acyrthosiphon (aphid) IKIIIIGSGV GGTAAAARLS KKGFQVEVYE KNSYNGGRCS IIR-HNGHRF DQGPSL— —YL
Ustilago (fungus) KKVVIIGAGA GGTALAARLG RRGYSVTVLE KNSFGGGRCS LIH-HDGHRW DQGPSL— —YL
Gibberella (fungus) KSVIVIGAGV GGVSTAARLA KAGFKVTILE KNDFTGGRCS LIH-NDGHRF DQGPSL— —LL
Staphylococcus (bacterium) MKIAVIGAGV TGLAAAARIA SQGHEVTIFE KNNNVGGRMN QLK-KDGFTF DMGPTI— —VM
Pantoea (bacterium) KRTFVIGAGF GGLALAIRLQ AAGIATTVLE QHDKPGGRAY VWQ-DQGFTF DAGPTV— —IT
Arabidopsis (plant) WDAVVIGGGH NGLTAAAYLA RGGLSVAVLE RRHVIGGAAV TEEIVPGFKF SRCSYLQGLL
Domain Bacteria Domain EukaryaDomain
Archaea
Cyanobacteria
Proteobacteria
Fungi
Plantae
Animalia
Chloroplasts
M
itochondria
Ancestral cell
populations Crenarchaeota
Euryarchaeota
c Figure 22.23 A tangled web of life.  
Horizontal gene transfer may have been  
so common in the early history of life  
that the base of a “tree of life” might  
be more accurately portrayed as a  
tangled web.
connected branches (Figure 22.23). Although scientists 
continue to debate how best to portray the earliest steps in 
the history of life, in recent decades there have been many 
exciting discoveries about evolutionary events that occurred 
over time. We’ll explore the mechanisms that underlie such 
events in the rest of this unit’s chapters, beginning with 
microevolution.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Nancy Moran: Studying  
symbioses and horizontal gene transfer
CONCEPT CHECK 22.6
1. Why is the kingdom Monera no longer considered a valid taxon?
2. Explain why phylogenies based on different genes can yield 
different branching patterns for the tree of all life.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how the origin of eukaryotes 
is thought to have represented a fusion of organisms, leading 
to extensive horizontal gene transfer. (See Figure 25.10.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   538 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 540 ===

A
C
Monophyletic group Polyphyletic group
Paraphyletic group
D
E
F
G
B
A
C
D
E
F
G
B
A
C
D
E
F
G
B
• Clades can be distinguished by their shared derived 
characters.
• Among phylogenies, the most parsimonious tree is the one that 
requires the fewest evolutionary changes. The most likely tree is 
the one based on the most likely pattern of changes.
• Well-supported phylogenetic hypotheses are consistent with a 
wide range of data.
? Explain the logic of using shared derived characters to infer 
phylogeny.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 22.1
Phylogenies show evolutionary  
relationships (pp. 522–526)
• Linnaeus’s binomial classification system gives organisms two-
part names: a genus plus a specific epithet.
• In the Linnaean system, species are grouped in increasingly broad 
taxa: Related genera are placed in the same family, families in 
orders, orders in classes, classes in phyla, phyla in kingdoms, 
and (more recently) kingdoms in domains.
• Systematists depict evolutionary relationships as branching 
phylogenetic trees. Many systematists propose that classifica-
tion be based entirely on evolutionary relationships.
Taxon A
Taxon B
Sister taxa
Basal taxon
Most recent
common
ancestor
Branch point
Taxon C
Taxon D
Taxon E
Taxon F
• Unless branch lengths are proportional to time or genetic change, 
a phylogenetic tree indicates only patterns of descent.
• Much information can be learned about a species from its evolu-
tionary history; hence, phylogenies are useful in a wide range of 
applications.
? Humans and chimpanzees are sister species. Explain what this 
statement means.
CONCEPT 22.2
Phylogenies are inferred from morphological  
and molecular data (pp. 526–527)
• Organisms with similar morphologies or DNA sequences are 
likely to be more closely related than organisms with very differ-
ent structures and genetic sequences.
• To infer phylogeny, homology (similarity due to shared ances-
try) must be distinguished from analogy (similarity due to con-
vergent evolution).
• Computer programs are used to align comparable DNA sequences 
and to distinguish molecular homologies from coincidental 
matches between taxa that diverged long ago.
? Why is it necessary to distinguish homology from analogy to infer 
phylogeny?
CONCEPT 22.3
Shared characters are used to construct phylogenetic 
trees (pp. 527–533)
• A clade is a monophyletic group that includes an ancestral 
species and all of its descendants.
CONCEPT 22.4
An organism’s evolutionary history is documented  
in its genome (pp. 533–534)
• Orthologous genes are homologous genes found in different 
species as a result of speciation. Paralogous genes are homolo-
gous genes within a species that result from gene duplication; 
such genes can diverge and potentially take on new functions.
• Distantly related species often have many orthologous genes. The 
small variation in gene number in organisms of varying complexity 
suggests that genes are versatile and may have multiple functions.
? When reconstructing phylogenies, is it more useful to compare 
orthologous or paralogous genes? Explain.
CONCEPT 22.5
Molecular clocks help track evolutionary  
time (pp. 534–536)
• Some regions of DNA change at a rate consistent enough to serve 
as a molecular clock, a method of estimating the date of past 
evolutionary events based on the amount of genetic change. 
Other DNA regions change in a less predictable way.
• Molecular clock analyses suggest that the most common strain of 
HIV jumped from primates to humans in the early 1900s.
? Describe some assumptions and limitations of molecular clocks.
CONCEPT 22.6
Our understanding of the tree of life continues  
to change based on new data (pp. 536–538)
• Past classification systems have given way to the current view of 
the tree of life, which consists of three great domains: Bacteria, 
Archaea, and Eukarya.
 CHAPTER 22  Phylogenetic Reconstruction 539
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
22 Chapter Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   539 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 541 ===

10. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION In a short 
essay (100–150 words), explain how genetic information—
along with an understanding of the process of descent with 
modification—enables scientists to reconstruct phylogenies 
that extend hundreds of millions of years back in time.
11. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This West Indian manatee (Trichechus manatus) is an aquatic 
mammal. Like amphibians and reptiles, mammals are tetrapods 
(vertebrates with four limbs). Explain why manatees are 
considered tetrapods even though they lack hind limbs, and 
suggest traits that manatees likely share with leopards and other 
mammals (see Figure 22.12b). Discuss how early members of the 
manatee lineage might have differed from today’s manatees.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
• Phylogenies based in part on rRNA genes suggest that eukaryotes 
are most closely related to archaea, while data from some other 
genes suggest a closer relationship to bacteria.
• Genetic analyses indicate that extensive horizontal gene 
transfer has occurred throughout the evolutionary history of life.
? Why was the five-kingdom system abandoned for a three-domain system?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Darwin suggested looking at 
a species’ close relatives to learn what its ancestors may have 
been like. Explain how his suggestion anticipates recent 
methods, such as phylogenetic bracketing and the use of 
outgroups in cladistic analysis.
9. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT (a) Draw a phylogenetic tree 
based on the characters in the table below. Draw hatch marks on 
the tree to indicate the origin of characters 1–6. (b) Assume that 
tuna and dolphins are sister species and redraw the phylogenetic 
tree accordingly. Use hatch marks to indicate the origin of 
characters 1–6. (c) Determine how many evolutionary changes 
are required in each tree. Identify the most parsimonious tree.
Character
Lancelet 
(outgroup)
Lamprey
Tuna
Salamander
Turtle
Leopard
Dolphin
(1) Backbone 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
(2) Hinged jaw 0 0 1 1 1 1 1
(3) Four limbs 0 0 0 1 1 1 1*
(4) Amnion 0 0 0 0 1 1 1
(5) Milk 0000011
(6) Dorsal fin 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
*Although adult dolphins have only two obvious limbs (their flippers), as 
embryos they have two hind-limb buds, for a total of four limbs.
540 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   540 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 542 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C22_PRF.indd   541 3/14/20   2:47 AM

=== SIDE 543 ===

Figure 23.1 The medium ground finch (Geospiza fortis) is a seed-eating bird that 
inhabits the Galápagos Islands. In 1977, the G. fortis population on the island of 
Daphne Major was decimated by a long period of drought: Of some 1,200 birds, 
only 180 survived. The surviving birds had larger, deeper beaks, indicating that this 
population of finches had evolved.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 23
• Figure 23.8 Walkthrough: Hardy-
Weinberg Equilibrium
• BioFlix® Animation: Natural Selection, 
Genetic Drift, and Gene Flow
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: The Hardy-Weinberg Principle
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module  
(in Instructor Resources)
• Mechanisms of Evolution
Study Tip
Make a table: This chapter discusses 
different types of selection—disruptive, 
stabilizing, sexual, balancing, frequency-
dependent, and heterozygote 
advantage. These types of selection are 
not all mutually exclusive, and some 
evolutionary changes are examples of 
more than one. To help you study, make a 
table like the one shown listing each type 
of selection, its distinguishing features, 
and example(s) from the chapter.
23.1 Genetic variation makes evolution 
possible p. 543
23.2 The Hardy-Weinberg equation 
can be used to test whether a 
population is evolving p. 545
23.3 Natural selection, genetic drift, 
and gene flow can alter allele 
frequencies in a population p. 549
23.4 Natural selection is the only 
mechanism that consistently causes 
adaptive evolution p. 553
KEY CONCEPTS
Microevolution23
Type of
selection
Distinguishing
features
Example
Balancing
selection
Directional
selection
Figures
23.17 and
23.18
Maintains two or more
phenotypes in a population; 
includes frequency-dependent 
selection and heterozygote
advantage
What mechanisms can cause the evolution of populations?
Evolution occurs when natural selection, genetic drift, or gene flow 
alter the allele frequencies of a population over time.
Genetic variation results 
in color variation in this 
hypothetical beetle 
population.
Natural
selection Genetic drift
Gene flow
The more visible darker beetles 
have been preyed on at a higher 
rate, causing lighter beetles (and 
the alleles they carry) to become 
more common over time.
By chance alone, alleles
encoding darker color
have become more 
common over several 
generations.
The arrival of beetles with 
a spotted color pattern 
has brought new alleles 
into the population.
542
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   542 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 544 ===

A common misconception about evolution is that individual 
organisms evolve. It is true that natural selection acts on 
individuals: Each organism’s traits affect its survival and re-
productive success compared with other individuals. But the 
impact of natural selection only becomes apparent in how a 
population of organisms changes over time.
T o see why, consider the population of medium ground 
finches decimated by a drought, resulting in only 180 survivors 
out of some 1,200 birds. Researchers Peter and Rosemary Grant 
observed that during the drought, small, soft seeds were scarce, 
while large, hard seeds were more plentiful. Birds with larger, 
deeper beaks were better able to crack and eat the larger seeds 
and survived at a higher rate than finches with smaller beaks.
Since beak depth is an inherited trait in these birds, the 
offspring of surviving birds also tended to have deep beaks. As 
a result, the average beak depth in the next generation of  
G. fortis was greater than it had been in the pre-drought popu-
lation (Figure 23.2). The finch population had evolved by nat-
ural selection. However, the individual finches did not evolve. 
Each bird had a beak of a particular size, which did not grow 
larger during the drought. Rather, the proportion of large 
beaks in the population increased from generation to genera-
tion: The population evolved, not its individual members.
Focusing on evolutionary change in populations, we can de-
fine evolution on its smallest scale, called microevolution, as a 
change in allele frequencies in a population over generations. In 
the finch population, for example, birds that had alleles encod-
ing large beaks survived at higher rates than did other birds—
causing those alleles to be more common after the drought 
than they had been before it. There are three main mechanisms 
that can cause such changes in allele frequencies: natural selec-
tion, genetic drift (chance events that alter allele frequencies), 
and gene flow (the transfer of alleles between populations). 
Each of these mechanisms affects the genetic composition of 
 populations, but only natural selection consistently improves 
the degree to which organisms are well suited for life in their 
environment (adaptation). Before we examine this more closely, 
let’s revisit a prerequisite for these processes: genetic variation.
  Instructors: A related 
Experimental Inquiry 
Tutorial can be assigned  
in Mastering Biology.
Average beak depth (mm)
0
8
9
10
1976
(similar to the
prior 3 years)
1978
(after
drought)
c Figure 23.2 Evidence of 
selection by food source.  
The data represent adult beak 
depths of finches hatched 
before and after the 1977 
drought. In one generation, 
natural selection resulted in a 
larger average beak size in the 
population.
Genetic variation makes 
evolution possible
In The Origin of Species, Darwin provided abundant evidence 
that life on Earth has evolved over time, and he proposed 
natural selection as the primary mechanism for that change. 
He observed that individuals differ in their inherited traits and 
that selection acts on such differences, leading to evolutionary 
change. Although Darwin realized that variation in heritable 
traits is a prerequisite for evolution, he did not know precisely 
how organisms pass heritable traits to their offspring.
Just a few years after Darwin published The Origin of Species, 
Gregor Mendel wrote a groundbreaking paper on inheritance 
in pea plants proposing a model of inheritance in which 
organisms transmit discrete heritable units (now called genes) 
to their offspring. Although Darwin did not know about 
genes, Mendel’s paper set the stage for understanding the 
genetic differences on which evolution is based.
Genetic Variation
Individuals within all species vary in their phenotypic traits. 
Humans, for example, vary noticeably in facial features, height, 
and voice. And though you cannot identify blood group (A, 
B, AB, or O) from a person’s appearance, this and many other 
molecular traits also vary extensively among individuals.
Such phenotypic variations often reflect genetic variation, 
differences among individuals in the composition of their 
genes or other DNA sequences. Some heritable phenotypic 
 differences occur on an “either-or” basis, such as the flower 
colors of Mendel’s pea plants: Each plant had flowers that 
were either purple or white (see Figure 14.3). Characters that 
vary in this way are typically determined by a single gene 
locus, with different alleles producing distinct phenotypes. 
In contrast, other phenotypic differences vary in gradations 
along a continuum. Such variation usually results from the 
influence of two or more genes on a single phenotypic char-
acter. In fact, many phenotypic characters are influenced by 
multiple genes, including coat color in horses (Figure 23.3), 
seed number in maize (corn), and height in humans.
How much do genes and other DNA sequences vary 
from one individual to another? Genetic variation at the 
CONCEPT 23.1
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Rosemary and Peter Grant:  
Studying evolution in the Galápagos 
finches
. Figure 23.3 Phenotypic variation in horses. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   543 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 545 ===

544 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Sources of Genetic Variation
Genetic variation originates when mutation, gene duplication, 
or other processes produce new alleles and new genes. Genetic 
variants can be produced rapidly in organisms with short gen-
eration times. Sexual reproduction can also result in genetic 
variation as existing genes are arranged in new ways.
Formation of New Alleles
New alleles can arise by mutation, a change in the nucleotide 
sequence of an organism’s DNA. Mutations can be caused 
by factors such as errors in DNA replication, exposure to UV 
light and other high-energy forms of radiation, and exposure 
to certain chemicals (see Concept 17.5). A change of as little 
as one base in a gene—a “point mutation”—can have a 
significant impact on phenotype, as in sickle-cell disease (see 
Figure 23.18). Furthermore, organisms reflect many genera-
tions of past selection, and hence their phenotypes tend to be 
well suited for life in their environments. As a result, most new 
mutations that alter a phenotype are at least slightly harmful.
In some cases, natural selection quickly removes such 
harmful alleles. In diploid organisms, however, harmful alleles 
that are recessive can be hidden from selection. Indeed, a 
harmful recessive allele can persist for generations by propa-
gation in heterozygous individuals (where its harmful effects 
can be masked by the more favorable dominant allele). Such 
“heterozygote protection” maintains a huge pool of alleles 
whole-gene level (gene variability) can be quantified as the 
average percentage of loci that are heterozygous. (Recall that 
a heterozygous individual has two different alleles for a given 
locus, whereas a homozygous individual has two identical 
alleles for that locus.) As an example, on average the fruit fly 
Drosophila melanogaster is heterozygous for about 1,920 of its 
13,700 loci (14%) and homozygous for all the rest.
Considerable genetic variation can also be measured at 
the molecular level of DNA (nucleotide variability). But little 
of this variation results in phenotypic variation. Why? Many 
nucleotide variations occur within introns, noncoding segments 
of DNA lying between exons, the regions retained in mRNA after 
RNA processing (see Figure 17.12). And of the variations that 
occur within exons, most do not cause a change in the amino 
acid sequence of the protein encoded by the gene. For example, 
in the sequence comparison shown in Figure 23.4, there are 43 
nucleotide sites with variable base pairs (where substitutions 
have occurred), as well as several sites where insertions or dele-
tions have occurred. Although 18 variable sites occur within 
the four exons of the Adh gene, only one of these variations (at 
site 1,490) results in an amino acid change. Note, however, that 
this single variable site is enough to cause genetic variation at 
the level of the gene, and hence two different forms of the Adh 
enzyme are produced.
It is important to bear in mind that some phenotypic 
variation does not result from genetic differences among 
individuals (Figure 23.5 shows a striking example in a cater-
pillar of the southwestern United States). 
Phenotype is the product of an inherited 
genotype and many environmental influ-
ences (see Concept 14.3). In a human 
example, bodybuilders alter their pheno-
types dramatically but do not pass their 
huge muscles on to the next generation. 
In general, only the genetically deter-
mined part of phenotypic variation can 
have evolutionary consequences. As such, 
genetic variation provides the raw mate-
rial for evolutionary change: Without 
genetic variation, evolution cannot occur.
A red arrow
indicates an
insertion site.
The substitution at this site
results in the translation
of a different amino acid.
1 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
Exon Intron
Base-pair
substitutions are 
shown in orange.
A deletion of
26 base pairs
occurred here.
. Figure 23.4 Extensive genetic 
variation at the molecular level. 
This diagram summarizes data 
from a study comparing the DNA 
sequence of the alcohol dehydrogenase 
(Adh) gene in several fruit flies 
(Drosophila melanogaster). The Adh gene has four 
exons (dark blue) separated by introns (light blue); 
the exons include the coding regions that are ultimately 
translated into the amino acids of the Adh enzyme 
(see Figure 5.1). Only one substitution has a phenotypic 
effect, producing a different form of the Adh enzyme.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figures 17.6 
and 17.11. Explain how a base-pair substitution 
that alters a coding region of the Adh locus 
could have no effect on amino acid sequence. 
Then explain how an insertion in an exon could 
have no effect on the protein produced.
(a) (b)
. Figure 23.5 Nonheritable variation. These caterpillars of the moth Nemoria arizonaria 
owe their different appearances to chemicals in their diets, not to differences in their 
genotypes. (a) Caterpillars raised on a diet of oak flowers resemble the flowers, whereas 
(b) their siblings raised on oak leaves resemble oak twigs.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   544 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 546 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 545
same is true of viruses. For instance, HIV has a generation time 
of about two days (that is, it takes two days for a newly formed 
virus to produce the next generation). HIV also has an RNA 
genome, which has a much higher mutation rate than a typical 
DNA genome due to the lack of RNA repair mechanisms in host 
cells (see Concept 26.2). Thus, single-drug treatments are less 
effective against HIV: Mutant forms of the virus, resistant to a 
particular drug, tend to proliferate quickly. The most effective 
AIDS treatments to date have been drug “cocktails” that com-
bine several medications. This approach has worked well as it is 
less likely that a set of mutations that together confer resistance 
to all the drugs will occur in a short time period.
Sexual Reproduction
In organisms that reproduce sexually, most of the genetic 
variation in a population results from the unique combina-
tion of alleles that each individual receives from its parents. 
Of course, at the nucleotide level, all the differences among 
these alleles have originated from past mutations. Sexual 
reproduction then shuffles existing alleles and deals them at 
random to produce individual genotypes.
Three mechanisms contribute to this shuffling: crossing 
over, independent assortment of chromosomes, and fer-
tilization (see Concept 13.4). During meiosis, homologous 
chromosomes, one inherited from each parent, trade some of 
their alleles by crossing over. The resulting recombinant chro-
mosomes are then distributed at random into gametes. Then, 
because myriad possible mating combinations exist in a pop-
ulation, fertilization typically brings together gametes with 
different genetic backgrounds. Together, these three mecha-
nisms ensure that sexual reproduction rearranges existing 
alleles into fresh combinations each generation, providing 
much of the genetic variation that makes evolution possible.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Origins of Genetic Variation
that may be harmful under present conditions, but that could 
be beneficial if the environment changes.
While many mutations are harmful, many others are not. 
Recall that much of the DNA in eukaryotic genomes does not 
encode proteins (see Figure 20.6). Point mutations in these 
noncoding regions generally result in neutral variation, 
differences in DNA sequence that do not confer a selective 
advantage or disadvantage. The redundancy in the genetic 
code is another source of neutral variation: Even a point 
mutation in a gene that encodes a protein will have no effect 
on the protein’s function if the amino acid doesn’t change. 
And even a change in the amino acid may not affect the pro-
tein’s shape and function. Moreover, a mutant allele may on 
rare occasions actually make its bearer better suited to the 
environment, enhancing reproductive success.
Finally, note that in multicellular organisms, only muta-
tions in cell lines that produce gametes can be passed to 
offspring. In plants and fungi, this is not as limiting as it may 
sound, since many different cell lines can produce gametes. 
But in most animals, the majority of mutations occur in 
somatic cells and are not passed to offspring.
Altering Gene Number or Position
Chromosomal changes that delete, disrupt, or rearrange 
many loci are usually harmful. However, when such large-
scale changes leave genes intact, they may not affect the 
organisms’ phenotype. In rare cases, chromosomal rearrange-
ments may even be beneficial. For example, the translocation 
of part of one chromosome to a different chromosome could 
link genes in a way that produces a positive effect.
A key potential source of variation is the duplication of genes 
due to errors in meiosis (such as unequal crossing over), slippage 
during DNA replication, or the activities of transposable elements 
(see Concept 20.5). Duplications of large chromosome segments, 
like other chromosomal aberrations, are often harmful, but the 
duplication of smaller pieces of DNA may not be. Gene duplica-
tions that do not have severe effects can persist over generations, 
allowing mutations to accumulate. The result is an expanded 
genome with new genes that may take on new functions.
Such increases in gene number appear to have played a major 
role in evolution. For example, the remote ancestors of mam-
mals had a single gene for detecting odors that has since been 
duplicated many times. As a result, humans today have about 
380 functional olfactory receptor genes, and mice have about 
1,200. This dramatic proliferation of olfactory genes probably 
helped early mammals, enabling them to detect faint odors and 
to distinguish among many different smells.
Rapid Reproduction
Mutation rates tend to be low in plants and animals, averaging 
about one mutation in every 100,000 genes per generation, 
and are often even lower in prokaryotes. But prokaryotes have 
many more generations per unit of time, so mutations can 
quickly generate genetic variation in their populations. The 
CONCEPT CHECK 23.1
1. Explain why genetic variation within a population is a pre-
requisite for evolution.
2. Of all the mutations that occur in a population, why do only 
a small fraction become widespread?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS If a population stopped reproducing 
sexually but still reproduced asexually, how would its genetic 
variation be affected over time? (See Concept 13.4.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
The Hardy-Weinberg equation 
can be used to test whether  
a population is evolving
The presence of genetic variation in a population does not guar-
antee that the population will evolve. For evolution to occur, 
CONCEPT 23.2
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   545 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 547 ===

546 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
one or more factors must be at work. In this section, we’ll explore 
one way to test whether evolution is occurring in a population. 
Gene Pools and Allele Frequencies
A population is a group of individuals of the same species 
that live in the same area and interbreed, producing fertile 
offspring. Different populations of a species may be isolated 
geographically from one another, exchanging genetic mate-
rial only rarely. This is common for species that live on widely 
separated islands or in different lakes, but not all populations 
are isolated (Figure 23.6). Still, members of a population 
typically breed with one another and thus are more closely 
related to each other than to members of other populations.
We can characterize a population’s genetic makeup by 
describing its gene pool, which consists of all copies of every 
type of allele at every locus in all members of the population. 
If only one allele exists for a particular locus in a population, 
that allele is said to be fixed in the gene pool, and all individu-
als are homozygous for that allele. But if there are two or more 
alleles for a particular locus in a population, individuals may 
be either homozygous or heterozygous.
For example, imagine a population of 500 
wildflower plants with two alleles, CR and CW, 
for a locus that codes for flower pigment. 
These alleles show incomplete dominance; 
thus, each genotype has a distinct phenotype. 
Plants homozygous for the CR allele (CRCR) 
produce red pigment and have red flowers; 
plants homozygous for the CW allele (CWCW) 
produce no red pigment and have white flow-
ers; and heterozygotes (CRCW) produce some 
red pigment and have pink flowers.
Each genotype and each allele has a frequency (proportion) 
in the population. To see how these frequencies are calculated, 
suppose our population has 320 plants with red flowers (geno-
type CRCR), 160 with pink flowers (genotype CRCW), and 20 with 
white flowers (genotype CWCW). Since 320 of the 500 
plants have red flowers, the frequency of the CRCR gen-
otype is 0.64 (320/500). Likewise, the frequency of the 
CRCW genotype is 0.32 (160/500) and the frequency of 
the CWCW genotype is 0.04 (20/500).
With respect to allele frequencies, 
wildflowers are diploid organisms, 
so each individual has two alleles 
for each of its genes. Hence, the 
500 individuals in our popula-
tion have a total of 1,000 copies 
of the gene for flower color. The 
CR allele accounts for 800 of these 
copies (320*2=640 for CRCR 
plants, plus 160*1=160 for CRCW 
plants). Thus, the frequency of the CR 
allele is 800/1,000=0.8 (80%).
When studying a locus with two alleles, the convention is to 
use p to represent the frequency of one allele and q to represent 
the frequency of the other allele. Thus, p, the frequency of the CR 
allele in the gene pool of this population, is p=0.8 (80%). And 
because there are only two alleles for this gene, the frequency of 
the CW allele, represented by q, must be q=1-p=0.2 (20%). 
For loci that have more than two alleles, the sum of all allele fre-
quencies must still equal 1 (100%).
The Hardy-Weinberg Equation
One way to assess whether natural selection or other factors 
are causing evolution at a particular locus is to determine 
what the genetic makeup of a population would be if it were 
not evolving at that locus. We can then compare that with 
the data we actually observed for the population. If there 
are no differences, this suggests that the population is not 
evolving. If there are differences, this suggests that the pop-
ulation is evolving—and then we can investigate why.
Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium
In a population that is not evolving, allele and genotype fre-
quencies will remain constant from generation to generation, 
provided that only Mendelian segregation and recombina-
tion of alleles are at work. Such a population is said to be in 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, named for the British 
mathematician and German physician, respectively, who 
independently developed this idea in 1908.
To determine whether a population is in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium, it is helpful to think about genetic crosses in a 
new way. Previously, we used Punnett squares to determine 
the genotypes of offspring in a genetic cross (see Figure 14.5). 
Here, instead of considering the possible allele combinations 
from one cross, we’ll consider the combination of alleles in all 
of the crosses in a population. Imagine that all the alleles for a 
given locus from all the individuals in a population are placed 
CRCR
CWCW
CRCW
Porcupine
herd range
Porcupine herd Fortymile herd
Fortymile
herd range
ALASKA
CANADA
MAP
AREA
. Figure 23.6 One species, two populations. These two caribou populations  
in the Yukon are not totally isolated; they sometimes share  
the same area (shaded purple). Still, members of each  
population are most  
likely to breed within  
their own population.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   546 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 548 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 547
The probability that two CR alleles will come together is 
p*p=p2=0.8*0.8=0.64. Thus, about 64% of the 
plants in the next generation will have the genotype CRCR. 
The frequency of CWCW individuals is expected to be about 
q*q=q2=0.2*0.2=0.04, or 4%. CRCW heterozygotes 
can arise in two different ways. If the sperm provides the CR 
allele and the egg provides the CW allele, the resulting het-
erozygotes will be p*q=0.8*0.2=0.16, or 16% of  
the total. If the sperm provides the CW allele and the 
egg the CR allele, the heterozygous offspring will make 
up q*p=0.2*0.8=0.16, or 16%. The frequency 
of heterozygotes is thus the sum of these possibilities: 
pq+qp=2pq=0.16+0.16=0.32, or 32%.
As shown in Figure 23.8, the genotype frequencies in the 
next generation must add up to 1 (100%). Thus, the equation 
in a large bin (Figure 23.7). We can think of this bin as hold-
ing the population’s gene pool for that locus. “Reproduction” 
occurs by selecting alleles at random from the bin; somewhat 
similar events occur in nature when fishes release sperm and 
eggs into the water or when plant sperm (in pollen) is blown 
about by the wind. By viewing reproduction as a process of 
randomly selecting and combining alleles from the bin (the 
gene pool), we are in effect assuming that mating occurs at 
random: that all male-female matings are equally likely.
Let’s apply the bin analogy to the hypothetical wildflower 
population discussed earlier. In that population of 500 flowers, 
the frequency of the allele for red flowers (CR) is p=0.8, and 
the frequency of the allele for white flowers (CW) is q=0.2. 
This implies that a bin holding all 1,000 copies of the flower-
color gene in the population would contain 800 CR alleles and 
200 CW alleles. Assuming that gametes are formed by selecting 
alleles at random from the bin, the probability that an egg or 
sperm contains a CR or CW allele is equal to the frequency of 
these alleles in the bin. Thus, as shown in Figure 23.7, each egg 
(and each sperm) has an 80% chance of containing a CR allele 
and a 20% chance of containing a CW allele.
Using the rule of multiplication (see Figure 14.9), we 
can now calculate the frequencies of the three possible 
genotypes, assuming random unions of sperm and eggs. 
3
     The allele
frequencies of
the population
are 0.8 (80%)
and 0.2 (20%).
1
     If all of these
alleles could be
placed in a large
bin (representing
the gene pool),
80% would be CR
and 20% would
be CW.
2
     Assuming
mating is random,
each time two
gametes come
together, there is
an 80% chance the
egg carries a CR
allele and a 20%
chance it carries
a CW allele.
Frequencies of alleles
Alleles in the population
Gametes produced
Each egg: Each sperm:
80%
chance
20%
chance
80%
chance
20%
chance
p = frequency of CR allele      = 0.8
q = frequency of CW allele      = 0.2
     Likewise, each sperm has an 80%
chance of carrying a CR allele and a
20% chance of carrying a CW allele.
4
. Figure 23.7 Selecting alleles at random from a gene pool.
DRAW IT Draw a bin with six white balls instead of four. For the frequency 
of CR to remain equal to 0.8, how many red balls should the bin contain?
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Allele Frequencies
80% CR (p = 0.8) 20% CW (q = 0.2)
0.16 (qp) 
CRCW 
0.16 (pq) 
CRCW 
0.04 (q2) 
CWCW 
CW
CW
CR
CR
0.64 (p2) 
CRCR 
p = 0.8
p = 0.8
q = 0.2
q = 0.2
Sperm
Eggs
Gene pool of the initial (parental) generation:
Genotypes in this offspring generation:
64% CRCR, 32% CRCW, and 4% CWCW
Alleles in this offspring generation:
With random mating, allele frequencies will result in the same
mix of genotypes in the next generation:
64% CRCR, 32% CRCW, and 4% CWCW plants
64% CR 
(from CRCR plants)
16% CR 
(from CRCW plants) 80% CR = 0.8 = p+ =
4% CW 
(from CWCW plants)
16% CW 
(from CRCW plants) 20% CW = 0.2 = q+ =
. Figure 23.8 Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In our wildflower 
population, the gene pool remains constant from one generation 
to the next. Mendelian processes alone do not alter frequencies of 
alleles or genotypes.
WHAT IF? If the frequency of the CR allele were 0.6, predict the 
frequencies of the CRCR, CRCW, and CWCW genotypes.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   547 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 549 ===

548 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium states that if a population is 
not evolving at a locus with two alleles, the three genotypes 
will appear in the following proportions:
p 2 + 2pq + q 2 = 1
Expected Expected Expected
frequency frequency frequency
of genotype of genotype of genotype
CRCR
CRCW CWCW
Note that for a locus with two alleles, only three genotypes 
are possible (in this case, CRCR, CRCW, and CWCW). As a result, 
the sum of the frequencies of the three genotypes must equal 
1 (100%) in any population regardless of whether the popu-
lation is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The key point is 
that a population is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium only if 
the observed genotype frequency of one homozygote is p2, 
the observed frequency of the other homozygote is q2,  
and the observed frequency of heterozygotes is 2pq. Finally, 
as suggested by Figure 23.8, if a population such as our wild-
flowers is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and its members 
continue to mate randomly generation after generation, 
allele and genotype frequencies will remain constant. The 
system operates somewhat like a deck of cards: No matter 
how many times the deck is reshuffled to deal out new hands, 
the deck itself remains the same. Aces do not grow more 
numerous than jacks. And the repeated shuffling of a popula-
tion’s gene pool over the generations cannot, in itself, change 
the frequency of one allele relative to another.
Conditions for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium
The Hardy-Weinberg approach describes a population that 
is not evolving. This can occur if a population meets all five 
of the conditions for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium listed in 
Table 23.1. But in nature, the allele and genotype frequen-
cies of a population often do change over time. Such changes 
can occur when at least one of the conditions for Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium is not met.
Although departure from the conditions in Table 23.1 is  
common—resulting in evolutionary change—it is also 
common for natural populations to be in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium for specific genes. One way this can happen is if 
selection alters allele frequencies at some loci but not others. In 
addition, some populations evolve so slowly that the changes 
in their allele and genotype frequencies are difficult to distin-
guish from those predicted for a non-evolving population.
Applying the Hardy-Weinberg Equation
The Hardy-Weinberg equation is often used as an initial test 
of whether evolution is occurring in a population. The equa-
tion also has medical applications, such as estimating the 
percentage of a population carrying the allele for an inher-
ited disease. For example, consider phenylketonuria (PKU), 
a metabolic disorder that results from homozygosity for a 
recessive allele. This disorder occurs in about one out of every 
10,000 babies born in the United States. Left untreated, PKU 
results in mental disability and other problems. (As described 
in Concept 14.4, newborns are now routinely tested for PKU, 
and symptoms can be largely avoided with a diet very low in 
phenylalanine.)
To apply the Hardy-Weinberg equation, we must assume 
that no new PKU mutations are being introduced into the 
population (condition 1) and that people neither choose their 
mates on the basis of whether or not they carry this gene nor 
generally mate with close relatives (condition 2). We must 
also ignore any effects of differential survival and reproductive 
success among PKU genotypes (condition 3) and assume that 
there are no effects of genetic drift (condition 4) or of gene flow 
from other populations into the United States (condition 5). 
These assumptions are reasonable: The mutation rate for the 
PKU gene is low, inbreeding and other forms of nonrandom 
mating are not common in the United States, selection occurs 
only against the rare homozygotes (and then only if dietary 
restrictions are not followed), the U.S. population is very large, 
and populations outside the country have PKU allele frequen-
cies similar to those seen in the United States.
If all these assumptions hold, then the frequency 
of individuals in the population born with PKU will 
correspond to q2 in the Hardy-Weinberg equation 
(q2=frequency of homozygotes). Because the allele is  
recessive, we must estimate the number of heterozygotes 
rather than counting them directly as we did with the  
pink flowers. Recall that there is one PKU occurrence per 
10,000 births, which indicates that q2=0.0001. Thus, the 
frequency (q) of the recessive allele for PKU is
q=20.0001=0.01
and the frequency of the dominant allele is
p=1-q=1-0.01=0.99
Table 23.1    Conditions for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium
Condition Consequence if Condition Does Not Hold
1. No mutations The gene pool is modified if mutations occur 
or if entire genes are deleted or duplicated.
2.  Random  
mating
If individuals mate within a subset of the 
population, such as near neighbors or close 
relatives (inbreeding), random mixing of 
gametes does not occur and genotype 
frequencies change.
3.  No natural 
selection
Allele frequencies change when individuals 
with different genotypes show consistent 
differences in their survival or reproductive 
success.
4.  Extremely large 
population size
In small populations, allele frequencies 
fluctuate by chance over time (genetic drift).
5. No gene flow By moving alleles into or out of populations, 
gene flow can alter allele frequencies.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Causes of Evolutionary Change
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   548 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 550 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 549
Using the Hardy-Weinberg Equation to 
Interpret Data and Make Predictions
Is Evolution Occurring in a Soybean Population? One way 
to test whether evolution is occurring in a population is to com-
pare the observed genotype frequencies at a locus with those 
expected for a non-evolving population based on the Hardy-
Weinberg equation. In this exercise, you will test whether a soy-
bean population is evolving at a locus with two alleles, CG and 
CY, that affect chlorophyll production and hence leaf color.
How the Experiment Was Done Students planted soybean seeds 
and then counted the number of seedlings of each genotype at 
day 7 and again at day 21. Seedlings of each genotype could be dis-
tinguished visually because the CG and CY alleles show incomplete 
dominance: CGCG seedlings have green leaves, CGCY seedlings 
have green-yellow leaves, and CYCY seedlings have yellow leaves.
Data from the Experiment
Time 
(days)
Number of Seedlings
Green  
(CGCG)
Green-yellow 
(CGCY)
Yellow  
(CYCY) Total
7 49 111 56 216
21 47 106 20 173
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Use the observed genotype frequencies from the day 7 data to 
calculate the frequencies of the CG allele ( p) and the CY allele (q).
2. Next, use the Hardy-Weinberg 
equation (p2+2pq+q2=1) to 
calculate the day 7 expected fre-
quencies of genotypes CGCG, 
 CGCY, and CYCY for a population 
in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
3. (a) Calculate the observed fre-
quencies of genotypes CGCG, CGCY,  
and CYCY at day 7. (b) Compare 
these frequencies to the expected 
frequencies calculated in question 2. Is the seedling population in 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at day 7, or is evolution occurring? 
Explain your reasoning and identify which genotypes, if any, ap-
pear to be selected for or against.
4. (a) Calculate the observed frequencies of genotypes CGCG,  
CGCY, and CYCY at day 21. (b) Compare these frequencies to 
the expected frequencies calculated in question 2 and to the 
observed frequencies at day 7. Is the seedling population in 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at day 21, or is evolution occurring? 
Explain your reasoning and identify which genotypes, if any, ap-
pear to be selected for or against.
5. Homozygous CYCY individuals cannot produce chlorophyll. 
The ability to photosynthesize becomes more critical as 
seedlings age and begin to exhaust the supply of food that 
was stored in the seed from which they emerged. Develop a 
hypothesis that explains the data for days 7 and 21. Based on 
this hypothesis, predict how the frequencies of the CG and CY 
alleles will change beyond day 21.
  Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
CONCEPT CHECK 23.2
1. A population has 85 individuals of genotype AA, 320 of 
genotype Aa, and 295 of genotype aa. Calculate the geno-
type frequencies and the frequencies of alleles A and a.
2. The frequency of allele a is 0.45 for a population in Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium. What are the expected frequencies 
of genotypes AA, Aa, and aa?
3. WHAT IF? A locus that affects susceptibility to a degenera-
tive brain disease has two alleles, V and v. In a population, 
16 people have genotype VV, 92 have genotype Vv, and  
12 have genotype vv. Is this population evolving? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 23.3The frequency of carriers, heterozygous people who do not 
have PKU but may pass the PKU allele to offspring, is
2pq=2*0.99*0.01=0.0198
(approximately 2% of the U.S. population)
Remember, the assumption of Hardy-Weinberg equilib-
rium yields an approximation; the real number of carriers 
may differ. Still, our calculations suggest that harmful reces-
sive alleles at this and other loci can be concealed in a popula-
tion because they are carried by healthy heterozygotes. The 
Scientific Skills Exercise provides another opportunity for you 
to apply the Hardy-Weinberg equation to allele data.
Natural selection, genetic drift, 
and gene flow can alter allele 
frequencies in a population
Note again the five conditions required for a population to 
be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (see Table 23.1). A devia-
tion from any of these conditions is a potential cause of evo-
lution. New mutations (violation of condition 1) can alter 
allele frequencies, but because mutations are rare, the change 
from one generation to the next is likely to be very small. 
Nonrandom mating (violation of condition 2) can affect the 
frequencies of homozygous and heterozygous genotypes 
but by itself has no effect on allele frequencies in the gene 
pool. (Allele frequencies can change if individuals with cer-
tain inherited traits are more likely than other individuals 
to obtain mates. However, such a situation not only causes a 
deviation from random mating, but also violates condition 3, 
no natural selection.)
For the rest of this section we will focus on the three mech-
anisms that alter allele frequencies directly and cause most 
evolutionary change: natural selection, genetic drift, and 
gene flow (violations of conditions 3–5).
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   549 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 551 ===

550 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
the more likely it is that chance alone will cause a deviation 
from the predicted result. (In this case, the prediction is an 
equal number of heads and tails.) Chance events can also 
cause allele frequencies to fluctuate unpredictably from one 
generation to the next, especially in small populations—a 
process called genetic drift.
Figure 23.9 models how genetic drift might affect a small 
population of our wildflowers. In this example, drift leads to 
the loss of an allele from the gene pool, but it is a matter of 
chance that the CW allele is lost and not the CR allele. Such 
unpredictable changes in allele frequencies can be caused 
by chance events associated with survival and reproduction. 
Perhaps a large animal such as a moose stepped on the three 
CWCW individuals in generation 2, killing them and increas-
ing the chance that only the CR allele would be passed to the 
next generation. Allele frequencies can also be affected by 
chance events that occur during fertilization. For example, 
suppose two individuals of genotype CRCW had a small num-
ber of offspring. By chance alone, every egg and sperm pair 
that generated offspring could happen to have carried the CR 
allele and not the CW allele.
Certain circumstances can result in genetic drift having 
a significant impact on a population. Two examples are the 
founder effect and the bottleneck effect.
The Founder Effect
When a few individuals become isolated from a larger popula-
tion, this smaller group may establish a new population whose 
gene pool differs from the source population; this is called 
the founder effect. The founder effect might occur, for 
example, when a few members of a population are blown by 
a storm to a new island. Genetic drift, in which chance events 
alter allele frequencies, can occur in such a case because the 
Natural Selection
The concept of natural selection is based on differential suc-
cess in survival and reproduction: Individuals in a population 
exhibit variations in their heritable traits, and those with traits 
that are better suited to their environment tend to produce 
more offspring than those with traits that are not as well suited.
In genetic terms, selection results in alleles being passed  
to the next generation in proportions that differ from the 
present generation. For example, the fruit fly D. melanogaster 
has an allele that confers resistance to the insecticide DDT. 
This allele has a frequency of 0% in laboratory strains of 
D. melanogaster from flies collected in the wild in the early 
1930s, prior to DDT use. However, in strains established from 
flies collected after 1960 (following 20 or more years of DDT 
use), the allele frequency is 37%. Thus, this allele either arose 
by mutation between 1930 and 1960 or was present in 1930, 
but very rare. In any case, the rise in frequency of this allele 
most likely occurred because DDT is an effective poison that 
is a strong selective force in exposed fly populations.
As the D. melanogaster example suggests, an allele that con-
fers resistance to an insecticide will increase in frequency in a 
population exposed to that insecticide. Such changes are not 
coincidental. By consistently favoring some alleles over others, 
natural selection can cause adaptive evolution, in which 
traits that enhance survival or reproduction tend to increase in 
frequency over time. We’ll explore this process in Concept 23.4.
Genetic Drift
If you flip a coin 1,000 times, a result of 700 heads and 300 
tails might make you suspicious about that coin. But if you 
flip a coin only 10 times, an outcome of 7 heads and 3 tails 
would not be surprising. The smaller the number of coin flips, 
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCW
CRCW
CRCW
CRCW
CWCW
CWCW
CWCW
CWCW
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCR
CRCW
CRCW
CRCW
CRCW
Only 5 of
10 plants
leave
offspring.
Highlighted plants
leave offspring.
Generation 2
p = 0.5
q = 0.5
Generation 3
p = 1.0
q = 0.0
Only 2 of
10 plants
leave
offspring.
p (frequency of CR)
q (frequency of CW)
0.7
0.3
=
=
Generation 1
. Figure 23.9 Genetic drift. This small wildflower population has a stable size of ten plants. 
Suppose that by chance only five plants of generation 1 (those highlighted in yellow) produce fertile 
offspring. Again by chance, only two plants of generation 2 leave fertile offspring.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, 
summarize how the frequency of the C W 
allele changes over time.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   550 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 552 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 551
prairie chickens plummeted (Figure 23.11a). By 1993 fewer 
than 50 birds remained. These few surviving birds had low 
levels of genetic variation, and less than 50% of their eggs 
hatched, compared with much higher hatching rates of the 
larger populations in Kansas and Nebraska (Figure 23.11b).
These data suggest that genetic drift during the bottleneck 
may have led to a loss of genetic variation and an increase in 
the frequency of harmful alleles. To investigate this hypothe-
sis, researchers extracted DNA from 15 museum specimens of 
Illinois greater prairie chickens. Of the 15 birds, 10 had been 
collected in the 1930s, when there were 25,000 greater prairie 
chickens in Illinois, and 5 had been collected in the 1960s, 
when there were 1,000 greater prairie chickens in Illinois. By 
studying the DNA of these specimens, the researchers were 
able to obtain a minimum, baseline estimate of how much 
genetic variation was present in the Illinois population before 
the population shrank to extremely low numbers. This base-
line estimate is a key piece of information that is not usually 
available in cases of population bottlenecks.
storm indiscriminately transports some individuals (and their 
alleles), but not others, from the source population.
The founder effect probably accounts for the relatively 
high frequency of certain inherited disorders among isolated 
human populations. For example, in 1814, 15 British colo-
nists founded a settlement on Tristan da Cunha, a group of 
small islands in the Atlantic Ocean midway between Africa 
and South America. Apparently, one of the colonists carried a 
recessive allele for retinitis pigmentosa, a progressive form of 
blindness that affects homozygous individuals. Of the found-
ing colonists’ 240 descendants on the island in the late 1960s, 
four had retinitis pigmentosa. The frequency of the allele that 
causes this disease is ten times higher on Tristan da Cunha 
than in the populations from which the founders came.
The Bottleneck Effect
A sudden change in the environment, such as a fire or flood, 
may drastically reduce the size of a population. A severe 
drop in population size can cause the bottleneck effect, 
so named because the population has passed through a 
“bottleneck” that greatly reduces its size (Figure 23.10). By 
chance alone, certain alleles may be overrepresented among 
the survivors, others may be underrepresented, and some 
may be absent altogether. Ongoing genetic drift is likely to 
have substantial effects on the gene pool until the population 
becomes large enough that chance events have less impact. 
But even if a population that has passed through a bottleneck 
ultimately recovers in size, it may have low levels of genetic 
variation for a long period of time—a legacy of the genetic 
drift that occurred when the population was small.
Case Study: Impact of Genetic Drift on the Greater 
Prairie Chicken
Human actions sometimes create severe bottlenecks. Millions 
of greater prairie chickens (Tympanuchus cupido) once lived 
on the prairies of Illinois. As these prairies were converted to 
farmland during the 1800s and 1900s, the number of greater 
Original
population
Bottlenecking
event
Surviving
population
Greater prairie chicken
Range
of greater
prairie
chicken
Pre-bottleneck
(Illinois, 1820)
Grasslands in which the
prairie chickens live once
covered most of the state.
Location Population
size
Illinois
 1930–1960s
 1993
 
1,000–25,000
  <50
5.2
3.7
750,000 5.8
75,000–
200,000 5.8
93
<50
99
96
Kansas, 1998
 (no bottleneck)
Nebraska, 1998
 (no bottleneck)
Number
of alleles
per locus
Percentage
of eggs
hatched
In 1993, with less than 
1% of the grasslands
remaining, the prairie
chickens were found
in just two locations.
Post-bottleneck
(Illinois, 1993)
(a) The Illinois population of greater prairie chickens dropped from 
millions of birds in the 1800s to fewer than 50 birds in 1993.
(b) In the small Illinois population, genetic drift led to decreases in the 
number of alleles per locus and the percentage of eggs hatched.
. Figure 23.11 Genetic drift and loss of genetic variation.
. Figure 23.10 The bottleneck effect. Shaking a few marbles 
through the neck of a bottle is analogous to a drastic reduction in the 
size of a population. By chance, blue marbles are overrepresented in 
the surviving population and gold marbles are absent.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   551 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 553 ===

552 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
plants in our original population. The introduced CW alleles  
would modify our original population’s allele frequencies in 
the next generation. Because alleles are transferred between 
populations, gene flow tends to reduce the genetic differences 
between populations. In fact, if it is extensive enough, gene 
flow can result in two populations combining into a single 
population with a common gene pool.
Alleles transferred by gene flow can also affect how well 
populations are adapted to local environmental conditions. 
For instance, mainland and island populations of the Lake 
Erie water snake (Nerodia sipedon) differ in their color patterns 
(Figure 23.12): Nearly all snakes from the Ohio or Ontario 
mainlands are strongly banded, whereas the majority of snakes 
The researchers surveyed six loci and found that the 1993 
population had fewer alleles per locus than the pre-bottleneck 
Illinois or the current Kansas and Nebraska populations (see 
Figure 23.11b). Thus, as predicted, drift had reduced the 
genetic variation of the small 1993 population. Drift may 
also have increased the frequency of harmful alleles, leading 
to the low egg-hatching rate. To counteract these negative 
effects, 271 birds from neighboring states were added to the 
Illinois population over four years. This strategy succeeded: 
New alleles entered the population, and the egg-hatching rate 
improved to over 90%. Overall, studies on the Illinois greater 
prairie chicken illustrate the powerful effects of genetic drift 
in small populations and provide hope that in at least some 
populations, these effects can be reversed.
Effects of Genetic Drift: A Summary
The examples we’ve described highlight four key points:
1. Genetic drift is significant in small populations. 
Chance events can cause an allele to be disproportion-
ately over- or underrepresented in the next generation. 
Although chance events occur in populations of all sizes, 
they tend to alter allele frequencies substantially only in 
small populations.
2. Genetic drift can cause allele frequencies to 
change at random. Because of genetic drift, an allele 
may increase in frequency one year, then decrease the 
next; the change from year to year is not predictable. Thus, 
unlike natural selection, which in a given environment 
consistently favors some alleles over others, genetic drift 
causes allele frequencies to change at random over time.
3. Genetic drift can lead to a loss of genetic variation 
within populations. By causing allele frequencies to 
fluctuate randomly over time, genetic drift can eliminate 
alleles from a population. Because evolution depends on 
genetic variation, such losses can influence how effectively 
a population can adapt to a change in the environment.
4. Genetic drift can cause harmful alleles to become 
fixed. Alleles that are neither harmful nor beneficial can 
be lost or become fixed (reach a frequency of 100%) by 
chance through genetic drift. In very small populations, 
genetic drift can also cause alleles that are slightly harm-
ful to become fixed. When this occurs, the population’s 
survival can be threatened (as in greater prairie chickens).
Gene Flow
Natural selection and genetic drift are not the only phenomena 
affecting allele frequencies. Allele frequencies can also change 
by gene flow, the transfer of alleles into or out of a popula-
tion due to the movement of fertile individuals or their gam-
etes. For example, suppose that near our original hypothetical 
wildflower population there is another population consisting 
primarily of white-flowered individuals (CWCW). Insects  
carrying pollen from these plants may fly to and pollinate 
Percentage of individuals0
60
40
20
100
80
ABCD ABC D ABC D
Ohio mainland Ontario mainlandIslands
Kelleys
Island
Pelee
Island
Unbanded 
N. sipedon
(Pattern D)
Banded N. sipedon
(Pattern C)
Middle
Island
LAKE ERIE
OHIO
Bass
Islands
Detroit
Cleveland
LAKE ERIE
ONTARIO
OHIO
5 km
Banding patterns in snake populations
. Figure 23.12 Gene flow and local adaptation in the Lake 
Erie water snake (Nerodia sipedon). Researchers assigned letters 
to variations in coloration in N. sipedon populations. Color pattern A 
is strong banding, patterns B and C are intermediate banding, and 
pattern D is no banding. Banding is advantageous for camouflage in 
mainland environments, whereas having no bands is advantageous 
in island environments. However, gene flow from the mainland 
causes banding to persist in island populations.
WHAT IF? Suppose a severe weather event caused island populations 
to decrease in size but did not affect the size of mainland populations. 
Predict how gene flow from the mainland would affect color patterns in 
island populations in the year immediately after the storm. Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   552 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 554 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 553
CONCEPT CHECK 23.3
1. In what sense is natural selection more “predictable” than 
genetic drift?
2. Distinguish genetic drift from gene flow in terms of (a) how 
they occur and (b) their implications for future genetic varia-
tion in a population.
3. WHAT IF? Suppose two plant populations exchange pollen 
and seeds. In one population, individuals of genotype AA are 
most common (9,000 AA, 900 Aa, 100 aa), while the opposite 
is true in the other population (100 AA, 900 Aa, 9,000 aa). If 
neither allele has a selective advantage, what will happen 
over time to the allele and genotype frequencies of these 
populations?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 23.4
Natural selection is the only 
mechanism that consistently 
causes adaptive evolution
Evolution by natural selection is a blend of chance and “sort-
ing”: chance in the creation of new genetic variations (as in 
mutation) and sorting as natural selection favors some alleles 
over others. Because of this favoring process, the outcome 
of natural selection is not random. Instead, natural selection 
consistently increases the frequencies of alleles that provide 
reproductive advantage, thus leading to adaptive evolution.
Natural Selection: A Closer Look
To see how natural selection can cause adaptive evolution, 
we’ll begin with the concept of relative fitness and the differ-
ent ways that selection acts on an organism’s phenotype.
Relative Fitness
The phrases “struggle for existence” and “survival of the fit-
test” are commonly used to describe natural selection, but 
these expressions are misleading if always taken to mean 
direct competitive contests among individuals. There are 
animal species in which individuals, usually the males, lock 
horns or otherwise do combat to determine mating privi-
lege. But reproductive success is generally more subtle and 
depends on many factors besides outright battle. For exam-
ple, a barnacle that is more efficient at collecting food than 
its neighbors may have greater stores of energy and hence 
be able to produce a larger number of eggs. A moth may 
have more offspring than other moths in the same popula-
tion because its body colors more effectively conceal it from 
predators, improving its chance of surviving long enough to 
produce more offspring. These examples illustrate how in a 
given environment, certain traits can lead to greater relative 
fitness: the contribution an individual makes to the gene 
pool of the next generation relative to the contributions of 
other individuals.
Although we often refer to the relative fitness of a geno-
type, remember that the entity that is subjected to natural 
selection is the whole organism, not the underlying geno-
type. Thus, selection acts more directly on the phenotype 
than on the genotype; it acts on the genotype indirectly, via 
how the genotype affects the phenotype.
Directional, Disruptive, and Stabilizing Selection
Natural selection can alter the frequency distribution of heri-
table traits in three ways, depending on which phenotypes in 
a population are favored: through directional selection, dis-
ruptive selection, and stabilizing selection.
Directional selection occurs when conditions 
favor individuals exhibiting one extreme of a phenotypic 
from islands are unbanded or intermediate. Banding color-
ation is an inherited trait, determined by a few loci (with alleles 
that encode bands being dominant to alleles that encode the 
absence of bands). On islands, water snakes live along rocky 
shorelines, while on the mainland, they live in marshes. Snakes 
without bands are more well camouflaged in island habitats 
than are snakes with bands. Hence, on islands, snakes without 
bands survive at higher rates than do snakes with bands.
These data indicate that snakes without bands are favored 
by natural selection in island populations. Thus, we might 
expect that all snakes on islands would lack bands. Why 
is this not the case? The answer lies in gene flow from the 
mainland. In any given year, three to ten snakes from the 
mainland swim to the islands and join the populations there. 
As a result, each year such migrants transfer alleles for banded 
coloration from the mainland (where nearly all snakes have 
bands) to the islands. This ongoing gene flow has prevented 
selection from removing all of the alleles for banded color-
ation from island populations—thereby preventing island 
populations from adapting fully to local conditions.
Gene flow can also transfer alleles that improve the abil-
ity of populations to adapt to local conditions. For example, 
gene flow has resulted in the worldwide spread of several 
insecticide resistance alleles in the mosquito Culex pipiens, 
a vector of West Nile virus and other diseases. Each of these 
alleles has a unique genetic signature that allowed research-
ers to document that it arose by mutation in only one or a 
few geographic locations. In their population of origin, these 
alleles increased because they provided insecticide resistance. 
These alleles were then transferred by gene flow to other pop-
ulations exposed to insecticides, where again, their frequen-
cies increased as a result of natural selection.
Finally, gene flow has become an increasingly impor-
tant agent of evolutionary change in human populations. 
Humans today move much more freely about the world than 
in the past. As a result, mating is more common between 
members of populations that previously had very little con-
tact, leading to an exchange of alleles and fewer genetic dif-
ferences between those populations.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Natural Selection, 
Genetic Drift, and Gene Flow
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   553 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 555 ===

554 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
the status quo for a particular phenotypic character. For 
example, the birth weights of most human babies lie in 
the range of 3–4 kg (6.6–8.8 pounds). Babies who are much 
smaller suffer considerably higher rates of mortality; babies 
who are much larger show a slight increase in mortality.
Regardless of which type of selection occurs, however, the 
basic mechanism remains the same. Selection favors individ-
uals whose heritable phenotypic traits provide higher repro-
ductive success than do the traits of other individuals.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Selection  
for Tuskless Elephants 
The Key Role of Natural Selection  
in Adaptive Evolution
The adaptations of organisms include many striking exam-
ples. Certain octopuses, for example, have the ability to 
change color rapidly, enabling them to blend into different 
backgrounds. Another example is the remarkable jaws of 
snakes (Figure 23.14), which allow them to swallow prey 
much larger than their own head (a feat analogous to a per-
son swallowing a whole watermelon). 
Other adaptations, such as a version of 
an enzyme that shows improved func-
tion in cold environments, may be less 
visually dramatic but just as important 
for survival and reproduction.
Such adaptations can arise gradually 
over time as natural selection increases 
the frequencies of alleles that enhance 
survival or reproduction. As the propor-
tion of individuals that have favorable 
traits increases, the degree to which a 
range, thereby shifting a population’s frequency curve 
for the phenotypic character in one direction or the other 
(Figure 23.13a). Directional selection is common when a 
population’s environment changes or when members of 
a population migrate to a new (and different) habitat. For 
instance, an increase in the relative abundance of large seeds 
over small seeds led to an increase in beak depth in a popula-
tion of Galápagos finches (see Figure 23.2).
Disruptive selection (Figure 23.13b) occurs when con-
ditions favor individuals at both extremes of a phenotypic 
range over individuals with intermediate phenotypes. One 
example is a population of black-bellied seedcracker finches 
in Cameroon whose members display two distinctly differ-
ent beak sizes. Small-billed birds feed mainly on soft seeds, 
whereas large-billed birds specialize in cracking hard seeds. It 
appears that birds with intermediate-sized bills are relatively 
inefficient at cracking both types of seeds and thus have 
lower relative fitness.
Stabilizing selection (Figure 23.13c) acts against both 
extreme phenotypes and favors intermediate variants. This 
mode of selection reduces variation and tends to maintain 
Phenotypes (fur color)
Stabilizing selection removes 
extreme variants from the population 
and preserves intermediate types. If 
the environment consists of rocks of 
an intermediate color, both light and 
dark mice will be selected against.
Directional selection shifts the overall 
makeup of the population by favoring 
variants that are at one extreme of the 
distribution. In this case, lighter mice 
are selected against because they live 
among dark rocks, making it harder for 
them to hide from predators.
Disruptive selection favors variants 
at both ends of the distribution. These 
mice have colonized a patchy habitat 
made up of light and dark rocks, with 
the result that mice of an intermediate 
color are selected against.
Frequency of individuals
Evolved
population
Original
population
Original 
population
(a) (b) (c)
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 21.13. 
Which mode of selection has occurred in 
soapberry bug populations that feed on the 
introduced golden rain tree? Explain.
. Figure 23.13 Modes of selection. 
These cases describe three ways in which a 
hypothetical deer mouse population with 
heritable variation in fur coloration might 
evolve. The graphs show how the frequencies 
of individuals with different fur colors change 
over time. The large white arrows symbolize 
selective pressures against certain phenotypes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   554 3/14/20   2:50 AM

=== SIDE 556 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 555
species is well suited for life in its environment improves; 
that is, adaptive evolution occurs. However, the physical and 
biological components of an organism’s environment may 
change over time. As a result, what constitutes a “good match” 
between an organism and its environment can be a moving 
target, making adaptive evolution a continuous, dynamic pro-
cess. Environmental conditions can also differ from place to 
place, causing different alleles to be favored in different loca-
tions. When this occurs, natural selection can cause the popu-
lations of a species to differ genetically from one another.
And what about genetic drift and gene flow? Both can, in 
fact, increase the frequencies of alleles that enhance survival 
or reproduction, but neither does so consistently. Genetic 
drift can cause the frequency of a slightly beneficial allele 
to increase, or, alternately, to decrease. Similarly, gene flow 
may introduce alleles that are advantageous or ones that are 
disadvantageous. Natural selection is the only evolutionary 
mechanism that consistently leads to adaptive evolution.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Got Lactase?  
The Co-Evolution of Genes and Culture 
Sexual Selection
Charles Darwin was the first to explore the implications 
of sexual selection, a process in which individuals with 
certain inherited characteristics are more likely than other 
individuals of the same sex to obtain mates. Sexual selection 
can result in sexual dimorphism, a difference in secondary 
The skull bones of 
most terrestrial 
vertebrates are 
relatively rigidly 
attached to one 
another, limiting jaw 
movement. In contrast, 
most snakes have 
movable bones in their 
upper jaw, allowing 
them to swallow food 
much larger than 
their head.
The bones of the upper
jaw that are shown in
green are movable.
Ligament
. Figure 23.14 Movable jaw bones in snakes.
sexual characteristics between males and females of the same 
species (Figure 23.15). These distinctions include differences 
in size, color, ornamentation, and behavior.
How does sexual selection operate? There are several 
ways. In intrasexual selection, meaning selection within 
the same sex, individuals of one sex compete directly for 
mates of the opposite sex. In many species, intrasexual 
selection occurs among males. For example, a single male 
may patrol a group of females and prevent other males from 
mating with them. The patrolling male may defend his 
status by defeating smaller, weaker, or less fierce males in 
combat. More often, this male is the psychological victor 
in ritualized displays that discourage would-be competi-
tors but do not risk injury that would reduce his own fitness 
(see Figure 52.16). Intrasexual selection also occurs among 
females in a variety of species, including ring-tailed lemurs 
and broadnosed pipefish.
In intersexual selection, also called mate choice, 
individuals of one sex (usually the females) are choosy in 
selecting their mates from the other sex. In many cases, the 
female’s choice depends on the showiness of the male’s 
appearance or behavior (see Figure 23.15). What intrigued 
Darwin about mate choice is that male showiness may not 
seem adaptive in any other way and may in fact pose some 
risk. For example, bright plumage may make male birds more 
visible to predators. But if such characteristics help a male 
gain a mate, and if this benefit outweighs the risk from preda-
tion, then both the bright plumage and the female prefer-
ence for it will be reinforced because they enhance overall 
reproductive success.
How do female preferences for certain male characteris-
tics evolve in the first place? One hypothesis is that females 
prefer male traits that are correlated with “good genes.” If 
the trait preferred by females is indicative of a male’s overall 
genetic quality, both the male trait and female preference 
m Figure 23.15 Sexual dimorphism and sexual selection. 
A peacock (left) and a peahen (right) show extreme sexual 
dimorphism. There is intrasexual selection between competing 
males, followed by intersexual selection when the females choose 
among the showiest males.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   555 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 557 ===

556 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
for it should increase in frequency. Figure 23.16 describes 
one experiment testing this hypothesis in gray tree frogs.
In several bird species, the traits preferred by females are 
related to overall male health. Here, too, female preference 
appears to be based on traits that reflect “good genes”—in this 
case, alleles indicative of a robust immune system.
Experiment Female gray tree frogs (Hyla versicolor) 
prefer to mate with males that give long mating calls. To 
test whether the genetic makeup of long-calling (LC) males 
is superior to that of short-calling (SC) males, researchers 
fertilized half the eggs of each female with sperm from an LC 
male and the other half with sperm from an SC male. In two 
separate experiments (one in 1995, one in 1996), the result-
ing half-sibling offspring were raised in a common environ-
ment, and their survival and growth were monitored.
Recording of SC
male’s call
SC male gray
tree frog
LC male gray
tree frog
Female gray
tree frog
Offspring of
SC father
Offspring of
LC father
SC sperm Eggs LC sperm
Recording of LC
male’s call
3 3
Survival and growth of these half-sibling offspring compared
Results
Offspring Performance 1995 1996
Larval survival LC better NSD
Larval growth NSD LC better
Time to metamorphosis LC better (shorter) LC better (shorter)
NSD = no significant difference; LC better = offspring of LC males superior to 
offspring of SC males.
Conclusion B e c a u s e  o f f s p r i n g  f a t h e r e d  b y  a n  L C  m a l e  o u t-
performed their half-siblings fathered by an SC male, the 
team concluded that the duration of a male’s mating call is 
indicative of the male’s overall genetic quality. This result sup-
ports the hypothesis that female mate choice can be based on 
a trait that indicates whether the male has “good genes.”
Data from A. M. Welch et al., Call duration as an indicator of genetic quality in 
male gray tree frogs, Science 280:1928–1930 (1998).
INQUIRY IN ACTION Read and analyze the original paper in 
Inquiry in Action: Interpreting Scientific Papers.
WHAT IF? Why did the researchers split each female frog’s eggs into 
two batches for fertilization by different males? Why didn’t they mate 
each female with a single male frog?
Do females select mates based on traits 
 indicative of “good genes”?
/uni25BC Figure 23.16 Inquiry Balancing Selection
As we’ve seen, genetic variation is often found at loci affected 
by selection. What prevents natural selection from reducing 
the variation at those loci by culling all unfavorable alleles? As 
mentioned earlier, in diploid organisms, many unfavorable 
recessive alleles persist because they are hidden from selec-
tion when in heterozygous individuals. In addition, selection 
itself may preserve variation at some loci, thus maintain-
ing two or more phenotypic forms in a population. Known 
as balancing selection, this type of selection includes 
frequency-dependent selection and heterozygote advantage.
Frequency-Dependent Selection
In frequency-dependent selection, the fitness of a phe-
notype depends on how common it is in the population. 
Consider the scale-eating fish (Perissodus microlepis) of Lake 
Tanganyika, in Africa. These fish attack other fish from behind, 
darting in to remove a few scales from the flank of their prey. 
Of interest here is a peculiar feature of the scale-eating fish: 
Some are “left-mouthed” and some are “right-mouthed.”
Because their mouth twists to the left, left-mouthed fish 
typically attack their prey’s right flank (Figure 23.17). (To 
see why, twist your lower jaw and lips to the left and imagine 
trying to take a bite from the left side of a fish, approaching 
it from behind.) Similarly, right-mouthed fish attack from 
the left. Prey species guard against attack from whatever 
phenotype of scale-eating fish is most common. Thus, from 
year to year, selection favors whichever mouth phenotype 
is least common. As a result, the frequency of left- and right-
mouthed fish oscillates over time, and this balancing selec-
tion keeps the frequency of each phenotype close to 50%.
Heterozygote Advantage
If individuals who are heterozygous at a particular locus 
have greater fitness than do both kinds of homozygotes, 
they exhibit heterozygote advantage. In such a case, 
natural selection tends to maintain two or more alleles at 
that locus. Note that heterozygote advantage is defined in 
terms of genotype, not phenotype. Thus, whether heterozy-
gote advantage represents stabilizing or directional selection 
depends on the relationship between the genotype and the 
phenotype. For example, if the phenotype of a heterozygote 
is intermediate to the phenotypes of both homozygotes, then 
heterozygote advantage is a form of stabilizing selection.
An example of heterozygote advantage occurs at the 
locus in humans that codes for the b polypeptide subunit 
of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein of red blood 
cells. In homozygous individuals, a recessive allele at that 
locus causes sickle-cell disease. The red blood cells of people 
with sickle-cell disease become distorted in shape, or sickled, 
under low-oxygen conditions (see Figure 5.19). These sick-
led cells can clump together and block the flow of blood in 
the capillaries, damaging organs such as the kidney, heart, 
and brain. Although some red blood cells become sickled in 
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   556 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 558 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 557
among those currently in the population, which may 
not be the ideal traits. New advantageous alleles do not 
arise on demand. For example, historically, snowshoe 
hares (Lepus americanus) have molted, changing their 
coats from brown to white, at a time of year that matched 
the onset of snowfall, providing camouflage all winter. 
But due to climate change, the first snowfall now oc-
curs later in the year. In some populations, the date at 
which the hares change their coat color has remained 
the same, causing the hares to be poorly camouflaged 
early in winter and thus easier for predators to spot and 
kill (Figure 23.19). Because their gene pools lack alleles 
that could delay when molting occurs, these populations 
have been unable to adapt to changing conditions.
2. Evolution is limited by historical constraints. 
Each species has a legacy of descent with modification 
from ancestral forms. Evolution does not scrap the an-
cestral anatomy and build each new complex structure 
from scratch; rather, evolution co-opts existing structures 
and adapts them to new situations. We could imagine 
that if a terrestrial animal were to adapt to an environ-
ment in which flight would be advantageous, it might be 
best just to grow an extra pair of limbs that would serve 
as wings. However, evolution does not work this way; 
instead, it operates on the traits an organism already has. 
Thus, in birds and bats, an existing pair of limbs took on 
new functions for flight as these organisms evolved from 
nonflying ancestors.
3. Adaptations are often compromises. Each organism 
must do many different things. A seal spends part of its 
time on rocks; it could probably walk better if it had legs 
instead of flippers, but then it would not swim nearly as 
well. We humans owe much of our versatility and athleti-
cism to our prehensile hands and flexible limbs, but these 
also make us prone to sprains, torn ligaments, and dislo-
cations: Structural reinforcement has been compromised 
for agility. Organisms face many such trade-offs in which 
the ability to perform one function may reduce the abil-
ity to perform another—and as with seals and humans, 
those trade-offs can restrict adaptive evolution.
heterozygotes, not enough become sickled to cause sickle-
cell disease.
As described in Figure 23.18, heterozygotes for the sickle-cell 
allele are protected against the most severe effects of malaria, 
a disease caused by a parasite that infects red blood cells. One 
reason for this partial protection is that the body destroys sickled 
red blood cells rapidly, killing the parasites they harbor. Malaria 
is a major killer in some tropical regions. In such regions, selec-
tion favors heterozygotes over homozygous dominant individu-
als, who are more vulnerable to the effects of malaria, and also 
over homozygous recessive individuals, who develop sickle-cell 
disease. These selective pressures have caused the frequency of 
the sickle-cell allele to reach relatively high levels in areas where 
the malaria parasite, which is carried by mosquitoes, is common.
Why Natural Selection Cannot Fashion 
Perfect Organisms
Though natural selection leads to adaptation, nature abounds 
with examples of organisms that are less than ideally suited 
for their lifestyles. There are several reasons why.
1. Selection can act only on existing variations. 
Natural selection favors only the fittest phenotypes 
INTERPRET THE DATA For 1981, 1987, and 1990, compare the 
frequency of left-mouthed individuals among breeding adults to the 
frequency of left-mouthed individuals in the entire population. What 
do the data indicate about when natural selection favors left-mouthed 
individuals over right-mouthed individuals (or vice versa)? Explain.
1.0
0.5
0
Sample year
”Left-mouthed”
  P. microlepis
”Right-mouthed”
  P. microlepis
Frequency of
left-mouthed individuals
1981 ‘83 ‘85 ‘87 ‘89
. Figure 23.17 Frequency-dependent selection. In a popula-
tion of the scale-eating fish Perissodus microlepis, the frequency of 
left-mouthed individuals (red data points) rises and falls in a regular 
manner. The black data points indicate the frequency of left-mouthed 
individuals among adults that reproduced in three sample years.
(a) (b)
. Figure 23.19 Lack of variation in a population can limit 
adaptation. For the snowshoe hare, changing its coat color 
from brown (a) to white (b) too early is disadvantageous, but the 
population lacks alleles that would encode a delay in molting.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   557 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 559 ===

An adenine has replaced a thymine in the 
template strand of the sickle-cell allele, 
changing one codon in the mRNA produced 
during transcription. This change causes an 
amino acid change in sickle-cell hemoglobin: 
A valine replaces a glutamic acid at one 
position. (See Figure 5.19.)
Sickle-cell allele
on chromosome
Template strand
Wild-type
allele
Sickled
 red blood cell
Normal 
red blood cell
Sickle-cell
hemoglobin
Normal hemoglobin
 (does not aggregate into fibers)
Fiber
Low-oxygen
conditions
C
GC
GC
GG
C
C
G
C
G
A
TA
T
A
T
G
CG
CG
C
G
C
T
A
T
AT
A
T
A
A
T
C
GC
GC
GG
C
C
G
C
G
A
TA
T
A
T
G
CG
CG
C
 G
C
T
A
T
AT
A
T
A
A
T
Events at the Molecular Level
• Due to a point mutation, the sickle-cell allele differs from the  
 wild-type allele by a single nucleotide. (See Figure 17.26.)
• The resulting change in one amino acid leads to hydrophobic  
 interactions between the sickle-cell hemoglobin proteins   
 under low-oxygen conditions.
• As a result, the sickle-cell proteins bind to each other in   
 chains that together form a fiber.
Consequences for Cells
• The abnormal hemoglobin fibers distort the red  
 blood cell into a sickle shape under low-oxygen  
 conditions, such as those found in small blood  
 vessels returning to the heart.
This child has sickle-cell disease, a genetic disorder that strikes individuals 
who have two copies of the sickle-cell allele. This allele causes an abnormality 
in the structure and function of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein 
in red blood cells. Although sickle-cell disease is lethal if not treated, in 
some regions the sickle-cell allele can reach frequencies as high as 15–20%. 
How can such a harmful allele be so common?
558 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
The Sickle-Cell Allele
/uni25BC Figure 23.18
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video:  
The Making of the Fittest:  
Natural Selection in  
Humans (Sickle-Cell Disease) 
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   558 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 560 ===

Distribution of malaria
caused by Plasmodium falciparum
(a parasitic unicellular eukaryote 
Frequencies of
the sickle-cell allele
>15.0%
     
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
6.0%
9.0%
12.0%
15.0%
–
–
–
–
Key
The sickled blood cells of a 
homozygote block small blood 
vessels, causing great pain and 
damage to organs such as the 
heart, kidney, and brain.
Normal red blood cells 
are flexible and are able 
to flow freely through 
small blood vessels.
Infected mosquitoes spread 
malaria when they bite 
people. (See Figure 28.16.)
Distribution of malaria
caused by Plasmodium falciparum
(a parasitic unicellular eukaryote 
carried by mosquitoes)
Frequencies of
the sickle-cell allele
>15.0%
     
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
6.0%
9.0%
12.0%
15.0%
–
–
–
–
Key
The sickled blood cells of a 
homozygote block small blood 
vessels, causing great pain and 
damage to organs such as the 
heart, kidney, and brain.
Normal red blood cells 
are flexible and are able 
to flow freely through 
small blood vessels.
Effects on Individual Organisms
• The formation of sickled red blood cells causes homo-
 zygotes with two copies of the sickle-cell allele to 
 have sickle-cell disease.
• Some sickling also occurs in heterozygotes, but not 
 enough to cause the disease; they have sickle-cell trait.
 (See Figure 14.17.)
Evolution in Populations
• Homozygotes with two sickle-cell alleles are strongly  
 selected against because of mortality caused by    
 sickle-cell disease. In contrast, heterozygotes 
 experience few harmful effects from sickling yet are   
 more likely to survive malaria than are homozygotes.
• In regions where malaria is common, the net effect 
 of these opposing selective forces is heterozygote    
 advantage. This has caused evolutionary change in   
 populations—the products of which are the areas 
 of relatively high frequencies of the sickle-cell allele   
 shown in the map.
In a region free of malaria, would individuals who are heterozygous 
for the sickle-cell allele be selected for or selected against? Explain.
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 559
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   559 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 561 ===

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
23 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 23.1
Genetic variation makes evolution possible  
(pp. 543–545)
• Genetic variation refers to genetic differences among individu-
als within a population.
• The nucleotide differences that provide the basis of genetic varia-
tion originate when mutation and gene duplication produce new 
alleles and new genes. New genetic variants are produced rapidly 
in organisms with short generation times. In sexually reproduc-
ing organisms, most of the genetic differences among individuals 
result from crossing over, the independent assortment of chro-
mosomes, and fertilization.
? Typically, most of the nucleotide variability that occurs within a 
genetic locus does not affect the phenotype. Explain why.
CONCEPT 23.2
The Hardy-Weinberg equation can be used to test 
whether a population is evolving (pp. 545–549)
• A population, a localized group of organisms belonging to one 
species, is united by its gene pool, the aggregate of all the alleles 
in the population.
• For a population in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, the allele 
and genotype frequencies will remain constant if the popula-
tion is large, mating is random, mutation is negligible, there 
is no gene flow, and there is no natural selection. For such a 
population, if p and q represent the frequencies of the only two 
possible alleles at a particular locus, then p2 is the frequency of 
one kind of homozygote, q2 is the frequency of the other kind 
of homozygote, and 2pq is the frequency of the heterozygous 
genotype.
? Is it circular reasoning to calculate p and q from observed genotype 
frequencies and then use those values of p and q to test if the population 
is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium? Explain your answer.
CONCEPT 23.3
Natural selection, genetic drift, and gene flow can 
alter allele frequencies in a population (pp. 549–553)
• In natural selection, individuals that have certain inherited
traits tend to survive and reproduce at higher rates than other  
individuals because of those traits.
• In genetic drift, chance fluctuations in allele frequencies over 
generations tend to reduce genetic variation.
• Gene flow, the transfer of alleles between populations, tends to 
reduce genetic differences between populations over time.
? Would two small, geographically isolated populations in very 
different environments be likely to evolve in similar ways? Explain.
CONCEPT 23.4
Natural selection is the only mechanism that 
consistently causes adaptive evolution (pp. 553–560)
• One organism has greater relative fitness than another organ-
ism if it leaves more fertile descendants. The modes of natural 
selection differ in their effect on phenotype:
Evolved populationOriginal population
Directional selection Disruptive selection Stabilizing selection
• Unlike genetic drift and gene flow, natural selection consistently 
increases the frequencies of alleles that enhance survival and 
reproduction, thus improving the degree to which organisms are 
well-suited for life in their environment.
• Sexual selection can result in secondary sex characteristics that 
can give individuals advantages in mating.
• Balancing selection occurs when natural selection maintains 
two or more forms in a population.
4. Chance, natural selection, and the environment 
interact. Chance events can affect the subsequent evo-
lutionary history of populations. For instance, when a 
storm blows insects or birds hundreds of kilometers over 
an ocean to an island, the wind does not necessarily 
transport those individuals that are best suited to 
the new environment. Thus, not all alleles present in the  
founding population’s gene pool are better suited to the 
new environment than the alleles that are “left behind.” 
In addition, the environment at a particular location 
may change unpredictably from year to year, again 
limiting the extent to which adaptive evolution results 
in organisms being well suited for current environmental 
conditions.
CONCEPT CHECK 23.4
1. What is the relative fitness of a sterile mule? Explain.
2. Explain why natural selection is the only mechanism that 
consistently leads to adaptive evolution in a population.
3. VISUAL SKILLS Consider a population in which heterozy-
gotes at a certain locus have an extreme phenotype (such 
as being larger than homozygotes) that confers a selective 
advantage. Compare this description to the three types of 
selection shown in Figure 23.13. Does this situation represent 
directional, disruptive, or stabilizing selection? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
With these four constraints, evolution does not result in 
perfect organisms. Natural selection operates on a “better 
than” basis. We can, in fact, see evidence for evolution in the 
many imperfections of the organisms it produces.
560 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   560 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 562 ===

 CHAPTER 23  Microevolution 561
8. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Heterozygotes 
at the sickle-cell locus produce both normal and abnormal 
(sickle-cell) hemoglobin (see Concept 14.4). When hemoglobin 
molecules are packed into a heterozygote’s red blood cells, 
some cells receive relatively large quantities of abnormal 
hemoglobin, making these cells prone to sickling. In a short 
essay (approximately 100–150 words), explain how these 
molecular and cellular events lead to emergent properties at the 
individual and population levels of biological organization.
9. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
The lake shown in this 
photograph, called 
a kettle lake, formed 
14,000 years ago when 
a glacier that covered 
the surrounding 
area melted. Initially 
devoid of animal life, 
over time the lake 
was colonized by 
invertebrates and other 
animals. Hypothesize 
how mutation, natural 
selection, genetic 
drift, and gene flow 
may have affected 
populations that 
colonized the lake.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How does a native species evolve in response  
to an introduced species? Go to “There’s a New Kid in Town”  
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
 TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Using at least two examples, 
explain how the process of evolution is revealed by the 
imperfections of living organisms.
7. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • INTERPRET THE DATA For 
populations of the marine mussel Mytilus edulis around Long 
Island, New Y ork, researchers measured the frequency of a 
particular allele (lap94) for an enzyme involved in regulating the 
mussel’s saltwater balance. They presented their data as a series 
of pie charts linked to sampling sites within Long Island Sound, 
where the salinity is highly variable, and along the coast of the 
open ocean, where salinity is constant. (a) Create a data table for 
the 1 1 sampling sites by estimating the frequency of lap94 from the 
pie charts. (b) Graph the frequencies for sites 1–8 to show how the 
frequency of this allele changes with increasing salinity in Long 
Island Sound (from southwest to northeast). Evaluate how the 
data from sites 9–1 1 compare with the data from the sites within 
the Sound. (c) Considering the various mechanisms that can alter 
allele frequency, construct a hypothesis that explains the patterns 
in the data and that accounts for the following observations: 
(1) The lap94 allele helps mussels maintain osmotic balance in 
water with a high salt concentration but is costly to use in less 
salty water; and (2) mussels produce larvae that can disperse long 
distances before they settle on rocks and grow into adults.
lap94 alleles Other lap alleles
Sampling sites
(1–8 represent
pairs of sites)
Salinity increases toward the open ocean
Long Island
Sound
Atlantic
Ocean
Allele
frequencies
Data from R. K. Koehn and T. J. Hilbish, The adaptive importance of genetic variation, 
American Scientist 75:134–141 (1987).
N
1
1
2
45
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
3
678
9
10
11
• There are constraints to evolution: Natural selection can act only 
on available variation; structures result from modified ancestral 
anatomy; adaptations are often compromises; and chance, natu-
ral selection, and the environment interact.
? How might secondary sex characteristics in males differ from those in 
females in a species in which females compete for mates?
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C23_PRF.indd   561 3/14/20   2:51 AM

=== SIDE 563 ===

Figure 24.1 This flightless cormorant is one of many species in the Galápagos 
Islands that are found nowhere else in the world. How did a bird that cannot fly 
come to live in this isolated place? When Darwin visited the Galápagos, he also was 
intrigued by its unique species, and later concluded that they must have originated 
in the islands from ancestors that had traveled from South America.
Species and Speciation24
How do new species originate from existing species?
Population
TIME
Reproductive
barrier (such as 
different habitats or 
mating behaviors)
No interbreeding
Gene flow
This population begins to 
diverge genetically 
from the other two 
populations.
A barrier to gene 
flow is established.
Three populations 
of a species are 
connected by
gene flow.
Eventually, this population is 
reproductively isolated 
from the other two—a
new species has formed.
Over time, populations of a single species connected by gene flow 
can diverge genetically, giving rise to a new species:
Gene flow 
continues between 
these populations.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 24
• Figure 24.10 Walkthrough: One 
Mechanism for Allopolyploid Speciation 
in Plants
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Interpreting Data: Evolution of 
Reproductive Barriers in Lab Populations 
of Fruit Flies
• Problem-Solving Exercise: Is Hybridization 
Promoting Insecticide Resistance?
Study Tip
Make a table: Some processes that 
can lead to speciation only occur in 
allopatric (geographically separated) 
populations, while others also 
occur in sympatric (geographically 
overlapping) populations. To help you 
keep track of these processes and the 
geographic conditions under which 
they can occur, fill in the table as you 
read the chapter.
24.1 The biological species concept 
emphasizes reproductive  
isolation p. 563
24.2 Speciation can take place  
with or without geographic 
separation p. 567
24.3 Hybrid zones reveal factors that 
cause reproductive isolation p. 572
24.4 Speciation can occur rapidly or 
slowly and can result from changes 
in few or many genes p. 576
KEY CONCEPTS
Process
(include page #
or ﬁgure #)
Can occur in
allopatric
populations
(yes/no)?
Sexual selection
(Figure 24.12) Yes Yes
Can occur in
sympatric
populations
(yes/no)?
562
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   562 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 564 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 563
species is a group of populations whose members have the 
potential to interbreed in nature and produce viable, fertile 
offspring—but do not produce viable, fertile offspring with 
members of other such groups (Figure 24.2). Thus, the mem-
bers of a biological species are united by being reproductively 
compatible, at least potentially. All human beings, for example, 
belong to the same species. A businesswoman in Manhattan 
may be unlikely to meet a dairy farmer in Mongolia, but if the 
two should happen to meet and mate, they could have viable 
babies who develop into fertile adults. In contrast, humans and 
chimpanzees remain distinct biological species, even where 
they live in the same region, because many factors keep them 
from interbreeding and producing fertile offspring.
What holds the gene pool of a species together, causing its 
members to resemble each other more than they resemble 
members of other species? Recall the evolutionary mecha-
nism of gene flow, the transfer of alleles between populations 
When Darwin came to the Galápagos Islands, he noted that  
they were teeming with unique species, like the flightless bird  
in Figure 24.1. Later, he realized that these species had formed 
relatively recently, writing in his diary, “Both in space and 
time, we seem to be brought somewhat near to that great 
fact—that mystery of mysteries—the first appearance of new 
beings on this Earth.”
The “mystery of mysteries” that captivated Darwin is 
speciation, the process by which one species splits into two 
species. Speciation fascinated Darwin (and many biologists 
since) because it has produced the tremendous diversity of 
life, repeatedly yielding new species that differ from existing 
ones. Speciation also helps to explain the many features that 
organisms share (the unity of life): When one species splits 
into two, the species that result share many characteristics 
because they are descended from this common ancestor. For 
example, at the DNA sequence level, such similarities indi-
cate that the flightless cormorant in Figure 24.1 is closely 
related to flying cormorants found in the Americas. This 
suggests that the flightless cormorant originated from an 
ancestral cormorant species that flew from the mainland to 
the Galápagos.
Speciation forms a conceptual bridge between 
microevolution, changes over time in allele frequencies in 
a population, and macroevolution, the broad pattern of 
evolution above the species level. An example of macroevo-
lutionary change is the origin of new groups of organisms, 
such as mammals or flowering plants, through a series of 
speciation events. We examined microevolutionary mecha-
nisms in Chapter 23, and we’ll turn to macroevolution in 
Chapter 25. In this chapter, we’ll explore the mechanisms 
by which new species originate from existing ones. First, let’s 
establish what we actually mean by a “species.”
(a) Similarity between different species. The eastern meadowlark 
(Sturnella magna, left) and the western meadowlark (Sturnella 
neglecta, right) have similar body shapes and colorations. 
Nevertheless, they are distinct biological species because their 
songs and other behaviors are different enough to prevent 
interbreeding should they meet in the wild.
(b) Diversity within a species. As diverse as we may be in appearance, 
all humans belong to a single biological species (Homo sapiens), 
defined by our capacity to interbreed successfully.
. Figure 24.2 The biological species concept is based on the 
potential to interbreed, not on physical similarity.
The biological species concept 
emphasizes reproductive isolation
The word species is Latin for “kind” or “appearance.” In daily 
life, we commonly distinguish between various “kinds” of 
organisms—dogs and cats, for instance—based on differences 
in their appearance. But are organisms truly divided into 
the discrete units we call species? To answer this question, 
biologists compare not only the morphology (body form) 
of different groups of organisms but also their physiology, 
biochemistry, and DNA sequences. The results generally con-
firm that morphologically distinct species are indeed discrete 
groups, differing in many ways besides their body forms.
The Biological Species Concept
The primary definition of species used in this textbook is the 
biological species concept. According to this concept, a 
CONCEPT 24.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   563 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 565 ===

564 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Prezygotic barriers impede mating or hinder fertilization if mating does occur
MATING
ATTEMPT
Habitat Isolation Temporal Isolation Behavioral Isolation Mechanical Isolation
Individuals
of
different
species
Two species that occupy 
different habitats within the 
same area may encounter each 
other rarely, if at all.
Species that breed during 
different times of the day, 
different seasons, or different 
years cannot mix their gametes.
Courtship rituals that attract 
mates and other behaviors 
unique to a species are effective 
reproductive barriers, even 
between closely related species.
Mating is attempted, but 
morphological differences 
prevent its successful 
completion.
Example: These two fly species 
in the genus Rhagoletis occur in 
the same geographic areas, but 
the apple maggot fly (Rhagoletis 
pomonella) feeds and mates on 
hawthorns and apples (a) while 
its close relative, the blueberry 
maggot fly (R. mendax), mates 
and lays its eggs only on 
blueberries (b).
Example: In North America, the 
geographic ranges of the western 
spotted skunk (Spilogale gracilis) 
(c) and the eastern spotted skunk 
(Spilogale putorius) (d) overlap, 
but S. gracilis mates in late 
summer and S. putorius mates in 
late winter.
Example: Blue-footed boobies, 
inhabitants of the Galápagos, mate 
only after a courtship display 
unique to their species. Part of the 
“script” calls for the male to 
high-step (e), a behavior that calls 
the female’s attention to his bright 
blue feet.
Example: Snails in the genus
Bradybaena approach each other
headfirst when they attempt to
mate. Once their heads have
moved slightly past each other, the
snails’ genitals emerge, and if their
shells spiral in the same direction,
mating can occur (f). But if a snail
attempts to mate with a snail
whose shell spirals in the opposite
direction (g), the two snails’ genital
openings (indicated by arrows) will
not be aligned, and mating cannot
be completed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
/uni25BC Figure 24.3 Exploring Reproductive Barriers
 Mastering Biology Video: 
Blue-Footed Boobies 
Courtship Ritual
(see Concept 23.3). Typically, gene flow occurs between the 
different populations of a species. This ongoing exchange of 
alleles tends to hold the populations together genetically. 
But as we’ll explore in this chapter, a reduction or lack of 
gene flow can play a key role in the formation of new species.
Reproductive Isolation
Because biological species are defined in terms of reproduc-
tive compatibility, the formation of a new species hinges 
on reproductive isolation—the existence of biological 
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   564 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 566 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 565
(l)
(m)
(k)
(j)
Postzygotic barriers prevent a hybrid zygote from developing into a viable, fertile adult
FERTILIZATION
Gametic Isolation Reduced Hybrid Viability Reduced Hybrid Fertility Hybrid Breakdown
VIABLE,
FERTILE
OFFSPRING
Sperm of one species may not 
be able to fertilize the eggs of 
another species. For instance, 
sperm may not be able to 
survive in the reproductive 
tract of females of the other 
species, or biochemical 
mechanisms may prevent the 
sperm from penetrating the 
membrane surrounding the 
other species’ eggs.
The genes of different parent 
species may interact in ways that 
impair the hybrid’s development 
or survival in its environment.
Even if hybrids are vigorous, they 
may be sterile. If the chromo-
somes of the two parent species 
differ in number or structure, 
meiosis in the hybrids may fail to 
produce normal gametes. Since 
the infertile hybrids cannot 
produce offspring when they 
mate with either parent species, 
genes cannot flow freely between 
the species.
Some first-generation hybrids 
are viable and fertile, but when 
they mate with one another or 
with either parent species, 
offspring of the next generation 
are feeble or sterile.
Example: Gametic isolation 
separates certain closely related 
species of aquatic animals, such as 
sea urchins (h). Sea urchins release 
their sperm and eggs into the 
surrounding water, where they 
fuse and form zygotes. It is 
difficult for gametes of different 
species, such as the red and purple 
urchins shown here (Strongylocen-
trotus franciscanus and 
S. purpuratus, respectively), to fuse 
because proteins on the surfaces 
of the eggs and sperm bind very 
poorly to each other.
Example: Some salamander 
subspecies of the genus Ensatina 
live in the same regions and habitats, 
where they may occasionally 
hybridize. But most of the hybrids do 
not complete development, and 
those that do are frail (i). 
Example: The hybrid offspring of a 
male donkey ( j) and a female horse 
(k) is a mule (l), which is robust 
but sterile. A “hinny” (not shown), 
the offspring of a female donkey 
and a male horse, is also sterile. 
Example: Strains of cultivated rice 
have accumulated different mutant 
recessive alleles at two loci in the 
course of their divergence from a 
common ancestor. Hybrids 
between them are vigorous and 
fertile (m, left and right), but plants 
in the next generation that carry 
too many of these recessive alleles 
are small and sterile (m, center). 
Although these rice strains are not 
yet considered different species, 
they have begun to be separated 
by postzygotic barriers.
(i)
(h)
factors (barriers) that impede members of two species 
from interbreeding and producing viable, fertile offspring 
(Figure 24.3). Such barriers block gene flow between the 
species and limit the formation of hybrids, offspring 
that result from an interspecific mating. Although a single 
barrier may not prevent all gene flow, a combination of 
several barriers can effectively isolate a species’ gene pool.
Clearly, a fly cannot mate with a frog or a fern, but the repro-
ductive barriers between more closely related species are not 
so obvious. As described in Figure 24.3, these barriers can be 
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   565 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 567 ===

566 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
The ecological species concept defines a species in terms 
of its ecological niche, the sum of how members of the species 
interact with the nonliving and living parts of their environ-
ment (see Concept 54.1). For example, two species of oak trees 
might differ in their size or in their ability to tolerate dry con-
ditions, yet still occasionally interbreed. Because they occupy 
different ecological niches, these oaks would be considered 
separate species even though they are connected by some gene 
flow. Unlike the biological species concept, the ecological spe-
cies concept can accommodate asexual as well as sexual spe-
cies. It also emphasizes the role of disruptive natural selection 
as organisms adapt to different environments.
In addition to those discussed here, more than 20 other 
species definitions have been proposed. The usefulness of 
each definition depends on the situation and the research 
questions being asked. For our purposes of studying how spe-
cies originate, the biological species concept, with its focus on 
reproductive barriers, is particularly helpful.
classified according to whether they contribute to reproduc-
tive isolation before or after fertilization. Prezygotic barriers 
(“before the zygote”) block fertilization from occurring. Such 
barriers typically act in one of three ways: by impeding members 
of different species from attempting to mate, by preventing an 
attempted mating from being completed successfully, or by hin-
dering fertilization if mating is completed successfully. If a sperm 
cell from one species overcomes prezygotic barriers and fertilizes 
an ovum from another species, a variety of postzygotic 
barriers (“after the zygote”) may contribute to reproductive 
isolation after the hybrid zygote is formed. Developmental errors 
may reduce survival among hybrid embryos. Or problems after 
birth may cause hybrids to be infertile or decrease their chance of 
surviving long enough to reproduce.
Limitations of the Biological Species Concept
One strength of the biological species concept is that it directs 
our attention to a way by which speciation can occur: by the 
evolution of reproductive isolation. However, the number of 
species to which this concept can be usefully applied is limited. 
There is, for example, no way to evaluate the reproductive 
isolation of fossils. The biological species concept also does 
not apply to organisms that reproduce asexually all or most of 
the time, such as prokaryotes. (Many prokaryotes do transfer 
genes among themselves, as we will discuss in Concept 27.2, 
but this is not part of their reproductive process.) Furthermore, 
in the biological species concept, species are designated by 
the absence of gene flow. But there are many pairs of species 
that are morphologically and ecologically distinct, and yet 
gene flow occurs between them. An example is the grizzly bear 
(Ursus arctos) and polar bear (Ursus maritimus), whose hybrid 
offspring have been dubbed “grolar bears” (Figure 24.4). As 
we’ll discuss, natural selection can cause such species to remain 
distinct even though some gene flow occurs between them. 
Because of the limitations to the biological species concept, 
alternative species concepts are useful in certain situations.
Other Definitions of Species
While the biological species concept emphasizes the 
separateness of different species due to reproductive barriers, 
several other definitions emphasize the unity within a species. 
For example, the morphological species concept distin-
guishes a species by body shape and other structural features. 
The morphological species concept can be applied to asexual 
and sexual organisms, and it can be useful even without 
information on the extent of gene flow. In practice, scientists 
often distinguish species using morphological criteria. A dis-
advantage of this approach, however, is that it relies on sub-
jective criteria; researchers may disagree on which structural 
features distinguish a species.
. Polar bear (U. maritimus)
b Grizzly bear (U. arctos)
b Hybrid
    “grolar bear”
m Figure 24.4 Hybridization between two species of bears in 
the genus Ursus.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Origin of 
Species: The Beak of the Finch 
CONCEPT CHECK 24.1
1. (a) Which species concept(s) could you apply to both asex-
ual and sexual species? (b) Which would be most useful for 
identifying species in the field? Explain.
2. WHAT IF? Suppose two bird species live in a forest and are 
not known to interbreed. One species feeds and mates in the 
treetops and the other on the ground. But in captivity, the 
birds can interbreed and produce viable, fertile offspring. 
What type of reproductive barrier most likely keeps these 
species separate in nature? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
 Mastering Biology Video: Prezygotic Barriers to Mating in 
Galápagos Finches by Peter and Rosemary Grant
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   566 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 568 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 567
and the seeds of some flowering plants. In contrast, small 
rodents may find a river or canyon a formidable barrier.
Once geographic isolation has occurred, the separated 
gene pools may diverge. Different mutations arise, and natu-
ral selection and genetic drift may alter allele frequencies in 
different ways in the separated populations. Reproductive iso-
lation may then evolve as a by-product of the genetic diver-
gence that results from selection or drift.
Figure 24.6 describes an example. On Andros Island, in 
the Bahamas, populations of the mosquitofish Gambusia 
hubbsi colonized a series of ponds that later became isolated 
from one another. Genetic analyses indicate that little or 
no gene flow currently occurs between the ponds. The envi-
ronments of these ponds are very similar except that some 
contain predatory fishes, while others do not. In ponds with 
predatory fishes, selection has favored the evolution of a mos-
quitofish body shape that enables rapid bursts of speed (see 
Figure 24.6a). In ponds without predatory fishes, selection 
has favored a different body shape, one that improves the 
ability to swim for long periods of time (see Figure 24.6b).
How have these different selective pressures affected 
the evolution of reproductive barriers? Researchers studied 
this question by bringing together mosquitofish from the 
two types of ponds. They found that female mosquitofish 
prefer to mate with males whose body shape is similar to 
their own. This preference establishes a behavioral barrier 
(a)Allopatric speciation. A pop-
ulation forms a new species 
while geographically isolated 
from its parent population. 
(b)Sympatric speciation. A 
subset of a population forms
a new species without 
geographic separation.
. Figure 24.5 The geography of speciation.
CONCEPT 24.2
Speciation can take place with  
or without geographic separation
Having discussed what constitutes a unique species, let’s 
return to the process by which such species arise from exist-
ing species. We’ll describe this process by focusing on the 
geographic setting in which gene flow is interrupted between 
populations of the existing species—in allopatric speciation 
the populations are geographically isolated, while in sympat-
ric speciation they are not (Figure 24.5).
Allopatric (“Other Country”) Speciation
In allopatric speciation (from the Greek allos, other, and 
patra, homeland), gene flow is interrupted when a popula-
tion is divided into geographically isolated subpopulations. 
For example, the water level in a lake may subside, resulting 
in two or more smaller lakes that are now home to separated 
populations (see Figure 24.5a). Or a river may change course 
and divide a population of animals that cannot cross it. 
Allopatric speciation can also occur without geologic change, 
such as when individuals colonize a remote area and their 
descendants become geographically isolated from the parent 
population. The flightless cormorant shown in Figure 24.1 
probably originated in this way from an ancestral flying 
species that reached the Galápagos Islands.
The Process of Allopatric Speciation
How formidable must a geographic barrier be to promote 
allopatric speciation? The answer depends on the ability of 
the organisms to move about. Birds, mountain lions, and coy-
otes can cross rivers and canyons—as can windblown pollen 
In ponds without predatory 
fishes, mosquitofish have a 
different body shape that 
favors long, steady swimming.
In ponds with predatory fishes, 
the mosquitofish‘s head is 
streamlined and the tail is 
powerful, enabling rapid bursts 
of speed.
(a) Differences in body shape
(b) Differences in escape acceleration and survival
Escape acceleration (m per s2)
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Source pond:
no 
predators
Source pond:
predators
present
Survival rate with predators
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Source pond:
no 
predators
Source pond:
predators
present
. Figure 24.6 Evolution in mosquitofish populations. 
Different body shapes have evolved in mosquitofish populations 
from ponds with and without predators. These differences affect 
how quickly the fishes can accelerate to escape and their survival 
rate when exposed to predators.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   567 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 569 ===

568 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Can divergence of allopatric populations lead  
to reproductive isolation?
/uni25BC Figure 24.7 Inquiry
Experiment A researcher divided a laboratory population of 
the fruit fly Drosophila pseudoobscura, raising some flies on a 
starch medium and others on a maltose medium. After one year 
(about 40 generations), natural selection resulted in divergent 
evolution: Populations raised on starch digested starch more 
efficiently, while those raised on maltose digested maltose more 
efficiently. The researcher then put flies from the same or differ-
ent populations in mating cages and measured mating frequen-
cies. All flies used in the mating preference tests were reared for 
one generation on a standard cornmeal medium.
to reproduction between mosquitofish from ponds with 
predators and those from ponds without predators. Thus, as a 
by-product of selection for avoiding predators, reproductive 
barriers have formed in these allopatric populations.
Evidence of Allopatric Speciation
Many studies provide evidence that speciation can occur in 
allopatric populations. For example, laboratory studies show 
that reproductive barriers can develop when populations are 
isolated experimentally and subjected to different environ-
mental conditions (Figure 24.7).
Field studies indicate that allopatric speciation also can 
occur in nature. Consider the 30 species of snapping shrimp  
in the genus Alpheus that live off the Isthmus of Panama, the 
land bridge that connects South and North America  
(Figure 24.8). Fifteen of these species live on the Atlantic side 
of the isthmus, while the other 15 live on the Pacific side. 
Before the isthmus formed, gene flow could occur between 
the Atlantic and Pacific populations of snapping shrimp. 
Did the species on different sides of the isthmus originate by 
allopatric speciation? Morphological and genetic data group 
these shrimp into 15 pairs of sister species, pairs whose member 
species are each other’s closest relative. In each of these 
A. formosus A. nuttingi
A. panamensis A. millsae
ATLANTIC OCEAN
PACIFIC OCEAN
Isthmus of Panama
. Figure 24.8 Allopatric speciation in snapping shrimp 
(Alpheus). The shrimp pictured are just 2 of the 15 pairs of sister 
species that arose as populations were divided by the formation of the 
Isthmus of Panama. The color-coded type indicates the sister species.
Initial population
of fruit flies
(Drosophila
pseudoobscura)
Some flies raised 
on starch medium
Some flies raised on
maltose medium
Mating experiments
after 40 generations
Results Mating patterns among populations of flies raised 
on different media are shown below. When flies from “starch 
populations” were mixed with flies from “maltose populations,” 
the flies tended to mate with like partners (see the lefthand 
table). But in a control group consisting of flies from two differ-
ent populations adapted to starch, the flies were about as likely 
to mate with flies of the other population as with flies of their 
own population (see the righthand table); similar results were 
obtained for control groups adapted to maltose.
Number of matings
in experimental group
22
8
Starch
9
20
Maltose
Male
Female
Number of matings
in control group
18
12
Starch
population 1
15
15
Starch
population 2
Male
Starch
population 1
Starch
population 2
StarchMaltose
Female
Conclusion In the experimental group, the strong prefer-
ence of “starch flies” and “maltose flies” to mate with like-
adapted flies indicates that a reproductive barrier was form-
ing between these fly populations. Although this barrier was 
not absolute (some mating between starch flies and maltose 
flies did occur), after 40 generations reproductive isolation 
appeared to be increasing. This barrier may have been caused 
by differences in courtship behavior that arose as an inciden-
tal by-product of differing selective pressures as these allo-
patric populations adapted to different sources of food.
Data from D. M. B. Dodd, Reproductive isolation as a consequence of adaptive 
divergence in Drosophila pseudoobscura, Evolution 43:1308–1311 (1989).
WHAT IF? Why were all flies used in the mating preference tests 
reared on a standard medium (rather than on starch or maltose)?
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   568 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 570 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 569
15 pairs, one of the sister species lives on the Atlantic side of 
the isthmus, while the other lives on the Pacific side. This fact 
strongly suggests that the two species arose as a consequence of 
geographic separation. Furthermore, genetic analyses indicate 
that the Alpheus species originated from 9 to 3 million years 
ago, with the sister species that live in the deepest water diverg-
ing first. These divergence times are consistent with geologic 
evidence that the isthmus formed gradually, starting 10 million 
years ago, and closing completely about 3 million years ago.
The importance of allopatric speciation is also suggested by the 
fact that regions that are isolated or highly subdivided by barriers 
typically have more species than do otherwise similar regions  
that lack such features. For example, many unique plants and ani-
mals are found on the geographically isolated Hawaiian Islands 
(we’ll return to the origin of Hawaiian species in Concept 25.4).  
Field studies also show that reproductive isolation between 
two populations generally increases as the geographic distance 
between them increases, a finding consistent with allopatric 
speciation. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can analyze data 
from one such study that examined reproductive isolation in 
geographically separated salamander populations.
Note that while geographic isolation prevents interbreed-
ing between members of allopatric populations, physical sep-
aration is not a biological barrier to reproduction. Biological 
reproductive barriers such as those described in Figure 24.3 
are intrinsic to the organisms themselves. Hence, it is biologi-
cal barriers that can prevent interbreeding when members of 
different populations come into contact with one another.
Sympatric (“Same Country”) Speciation
In sympatric speciation (from the Greek syn, together), 
speciation occurs in populations that live in the same geo-
graphic area (see Figure 24.5b). How can reproductive barriers 
form between sympatric populations while their members 
remain in contact with each other? Although such contact 
(and the ongoing gene flow that results) makes sympatric 
speciation less common than allopatric speciation, sympatric 
speciation can occur if gene flow is reduced by such factors 
as polyploidy, sexual selection, and habitat differentiation. 
(Note that sexual selection and habitat differentiation also can 
promote allopatric speciation.)
Identifying Independent and Dependent 
Variables, Making a Scatter Plot, and 
Interpreting Data
Does Distance Between Salamander Populations Increase 
Their Reproductive Isolation? Allopatric speciation begins 
when populations become geographically isolated, reducing 
mating between individuals in different populations and thus 
reducing gene flow. It is logical that as distance between popula-
tions increases, so will their degree of reproductive isolation. To 
test this hypothesis, researchers studied populations of the dusky 
salamander (Desmognathus ochrophaeus) living on different 
mountain ranges in the southern Appalachians.
How the Experiment Was Done T h e  r e s e a r c h e r s  t e s t e d  t h e  r e p r o-
ductive isolation of pairs of salamander populations by leaving one 
male and one female together and later checking the females for 
the presence of sperm. Four mating combinations were tested for 
each pair of populations (A and B)—two within the same population 
(female A with male A and female B with male B) and two between 
populations (female A with male B and female B with male A).
Data from the Experiment The researchers used an index of 
reproductive isolation that ranged from a value of 0 (no isolation) 
to a value of 2 (full isolation). The proportion of successful matings 
for each mating combination was measured, with 100% success = 1  
and no success = 0. The reproductive isolation value for two popu-
lations is the sum of the proportion of successful matings of each 
type within populations (AA + BB) minus the sum of the proportion 
of successful matings of each type 
between populations (AB + BA). 
The table provides distance and 
reproductive isolation data for 27 pairs 
of dusky salamander populations.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. State the researchers’ hypothesis, 
and identify the independent and 
dependent variables in this study. Explain why the researchers 
used four mating combinations for each pair of populations.
2. Calculate the value of the reproductive isolation index (a) if all of 
the matings within a population were successful, but none of the 
matings between populations were successful; (b) if salaman-
ders are equally successful in mating with members of their own 
population and members of another population.
3. Make a scatter plot to help you visualize any patterns that might 
indicate a relationship between the variables. Plot the indepen-
dent variable on the x-axis and the dependent variable on the  
y-axis. (For additional information about graphs, see the 
Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
4. Interpret your graph by (a) explaining in words any pattern 
indicating a possible relationship between the variables and  
(b) hypothesizing the possible cause of such a relationship.
  Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Data from S .  G .  T i l l e y ,  A .  V e r r e l l ,  a n d  S .  J .  A r n o l d ,  C o r r e s p o n d e n c e  b e t w e e n  s e x u a l  i s o-
lation and allozyme differentiation: a test in the salamander Desmognathus ochropha-
eus, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 87:2715–2719 (1990).
Scientific Skills Exercise
Geographic Distance (km) 15 32 40 47 42 62 63 81 86 107 107 115 137 147
Reproductive Isolation Value 0.32 0.54 0.50 0.50 0.82 0.37 0.67 0.53 1.15 0.73 0.82 0.81 0.87 0.87
Distance (continued) 137 150 165 189 219 239 247 53 55 62 105 179 169
Isolation (continued) 0.50 0.57 0.91 0.93 1.5 1.22 0.82 0.99 0.21 0.56 0.41 0.72 1.15
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   569 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 571 ===

570 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
three European species in the early 1900s: T. pratensis, T. dubius,  
and T. porrifolius. These three species are now common in the 
Pacific Northwest and many other parts of North America. In 
1950, a new Tragopogon species was discovered near the Idaho-
Washington border, a region where all three European species 
also were found. Genetic analyses revealed that this new species, 
Tragopogon miscellus, is an allopolyploid that originated from a 
hybrid of two of the European species (Figure 24.11). Although 
the T. miscellus population grows mainly by reproduction of its 
own members, hybridization between the parent species (fol-
lowed by a mitotic or meiotic error that doubles the chromo-
some number) continues to add new members to the T. miscellus 
population. Later, scientists discovered another new Tragopogon 
species, T. mirus, which also arose by polyploid speciation.
Many important agricultural crops—such as oats, cotton, 
potatoes, tobacco, and wheat—are polyploids. For example, 
the wheat used for bread, Triticum aestivum, is an allohexa-
ploid (six sets of chromosomes, two sets from each of three 
different species). The events that eventually led to modern 
wheat probably began about 8,000 years ago in the Middle 
Polyploidy
A species may originate from an accident during cell division  
that results in extra sets of chromosomes, a condition called 
polyploidy. Polyploid speciation occasionally occurs in 
animals; for example, the gray tree frog Hyla versicolor (see  
Figure 23.16) is thought to have originated in this way. However, 
polyploidy is far more common in plants. In fact, botanists 
estimate that more than 80% of the plant species alive today are 
descended from ancestors 
that formed by polyploid 
speciation.
Two distinct forms 
of polyploidy have been 
observed in plant (and a 
few animal) populations. 
An autopolyploid (from 
the Greek autos, self) is an 
individual that has more 
than two chromosome sets 
that are all derived from a 
single species. In plants, for  
example, a failure of cell 
division could double a cell’s  
chromosome number from 
the original number (2n) 
to a tetraploid number (4n) 
(Figure 24.9).
A tetraploid can produce fertile tetraploid offspring by self-
pollinating or by mating with other tetraploids. In addition, 
the tetraploids are reproductively isolated from 2n plants of 
the original population because the triploid (3n) offspring of 
such unions have reduced fertility. Thus, in just one genera-
tion, autopolyploidy can generate reproductive isolation 
without any geographic separation.
A second form of polyploidy can occur when two different 
species interbreed and produce hybrid offspring. Most such 
hybrids are sterile because the set of chromosomes from one 
species cannot pair during meiosis with the set of chromo-
somes from the other species. However, an infertile hybrid may 
be able to propagate itself asexually (as many plants can do). 
In subsequent generations, various mechanisms can change a 
sterile hybrid into a fertile polyploid called an allopolyploid 
(Figure 24.10). The allopolyploids are fertile when mating with 
each other but cannot interbreed with either parent species; 
thus, they represent a new biological species. The new species 
has a diploid chromosome number equal to the sum of the 
diploid chromosome numbers of the two parent species.
Although it can be challenging to study speciation in the 
field, scientists have documented at least five new plant spe-
cies that have originated by polyploid speciation since 1850. 
One of these examples involves the origin of a new species of 
goatsbeard plant (genus Tragopogon) in the Pacific Northwest. 
Tragopogon first arrived in the region when humans introduced 
Diploid cell
2n = 6
Tetraploid cell
4n
Cell
division
error
Meiosis
Cell from
new species
4nGametes produced
by tetraploids
2n
2n
. Figure 24.9 Sympatric 
speciation by autopolyploidy.
 Mastering Biology  
Figure Walkthrough
Normal gamete
from species A
n = 3
Normal gamete
from species B
n = 2
Sterile hybrid 
zygote
n = 5
Mitotic or meiotic error 
in a hybrid plant cell
doubles the chromosome
number.
Diploid
cell from
species A 
2n = 6
Diploid
cell from
species B
2n = 4
Diploid cell from
new species:
viable, fertile 
allopolyploid
2n = 10
. Figure 24.10 One mechanism for allopolyploid speciation 
in plants. Most hybrids are sterile because their chromosomes are 
not homologous and cannot pair during meiosis. However, such 
a hybrid may be able to reproduce asexually. This diagram traces 
one mechanism by which sterile hybrids can give rise to fertile 
allopolyploids that are members of a new species.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   570 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 572 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 571
East when an early cultivated wheat species hybridized with 
a wild grass. Today, plant geneticists generate new polyploids 
in the laboratory by using chemicals that induce meiotic 
and mitotic errors. By harnessing the evolutionary process, 
researchers can produce new polyploid species with desired 
qualities, such as a polyploid that combines the high yield of 
wheat with the hardiness of rye.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Speciation by Changes  
in Ploidy
Sexual Selection
There is evidence that sympatric speciation can also be driven 
by sexual selection. Clues to how this can occur have been 
found in cichlid fish from one of Earth’s hot spots of animal 
speciation, East Africa’s Lake Victoria. This lake was once 
home to as many as 600 species of cichlids. Genetic data 
indicate that these species originated within the last 100,000 
years from a small number of colonizing species that arrived 
from other lakes and rivers. How did so many species—more 
than double the number of freshwater fish species known in 
all of Europe—originate within a single lake?
One hypothesis is that subgroups of the original cichlid 
populations adapted to different food sources and the resulting 
genetic divergence contributed to speciation in Lake Victoria. But 
sexual selection, in which (typically) females select males based 
on their appearance (see Concept 23.4), may also have been a 
factor. Researchers have studied two closely related sympatric 
species of cichlids that differ mainly in the coloration of breeding 
males: Breeding Pundamilia pundamilia males have a blue-tinged 
back, whereas breeding Pundamilia nyererei males have a red-
tinged back (Figure 24.12). Their results suggest that mate choice 
based on male breeding coloration can act as a reproductive bar-
rier that keeps the gene pools of these two species separate.
T. dubius 
(12)
Polyploid species: 
T. miscellus 
(24)
Polyploid species: 
T. mirus 
(24)
T. pratensis 
(12)
T. porrifolius 
(12)
. Figure 24.11 Allopolyploid speciation in Tragopogon. The 
gray boxes indicate the parent species of the two new polyploid 
species. The diploid chromosome number of each species is shown 
in parentheses.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, identify the two parent species 
of each polyploid species.
Experiment Researchers placed males and females of 
Pundamilia pundamilia and P. nyererei together in two 
aquarium tanks, one with natural light and one with a 
monochromatic orange lamp. Under normal light, the two 
species are noticeably different in male breeding coloration; 
under monochromatic orange light, the two species are very 
similar in color. The researchers then observed the mate 
choices of the females in each tank.
P . pundamilia
P . nyererei
Normal light
Monochromatic
orange light
Results Under normal light, females of each species strongly 
preferred males of their own species. But under orange light, 
females of each species responded indiscriminately to males 
of both species. The resulting hybrids were viable and fertile.
Conclusion The researchers concluded that mate choice by 
females based on male breeding coloration can act as a repro-
ductive barrier that keeps the gene pools of these two spe-
cies separate. Since the species can still interbreed when this 
prezygotic barrier is breached in the laboratory, the genetic 
divergence between the species is likely to be small. This sug-
gests that speciation in nature has occurred relatively recently.
Data from O. Seehausen and J. J. M. van Alphen, The effect of male coloration 
on female mate choice in closely related Lake Victoria cichlids (Haplochromis 
nyererei complex), Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 42:1–8 (1998).
WHAT IF? Suppose that female cichlids living in the murky waters of 
a polluted lake could not distinguish colors well. In such waters, how 
might the gene pools of these species change over time?
Does sexual selection in cichlids result in 
reproductive isolation?
/uni25BC Figure 24.12 Inquiry
Habitat Differentiation
Sympatric speciation can also occur when a subpopula-
tion exploits a habitat or resource not used by the parent 
population. Consider the North American apple maggot 
fly (Rhagoletis pomonella), a pest of apples. The fly’s original 
habitat was the native hawthorn tree (see Figure 24.3a), but 
about 200 years ago, some populations colonized apple trees 
that had been introduced by European settlers. Apple maggot 
flies usually mate on or near their host plant. This results in 
a prezygotic barrier (habitat isolation) between populations 
that feed on apples and populations that feed on hawthorns. 
Furthermore, because apples mature more quickly than haw-
thorn fruit, natural selection has favored apple-feeding flies 
with rapid development. These apple-feeding populations 
now show temporal isolation from the hawthorn-feeding
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   571 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 573 ===

572 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
R. pomonella, providing a second prezygotic barrier to gene flow 
between the two populations. Researchers also have identified 
alleles that benefit the flies that use one host plant but harm the 
flies that use the other host plant. Natural selection operating on 
these alleles has provided a postzygotic barrier to reproduction, 
further limiting gene flow. Altogether, although the two popula-
tions are still classified as subspecies rather than separate species, 
sympatric speciation appears to be well under way.
Allopatric and Sympatric Speciation:  
A Review
Now let’s recap the processes by which new species form. 
In allopatric speciation, a new species forms in geographic 
isolation from its parent population. Geographic isolation 
severely restricts gene flow. Intrinsic barriers to reproduc-
tion with members of the parent population may then arise 
as a by-product of genetic changes that occur within the 
isolated population. Many different processes can produce 
such genetic changes, including natural selection under 
different environmental conditions, genetic drift, and 
sexual selection. Once formed, reproductive barriers that 
arise in allopatric populations can prevent interbreeding 
with the parent population even if the populations come 
back into contact.
Sympatric speciation, in contrast, requires the emergence 
of a reproductive barrier that isolates a subset of a popula-
tion from the remainder of the population in the same area. 
Though rarer than allopatric speciation, sympatric speciation 
can occur when gene flow to and from the isolated subpopu-
lation is blocked. This can occur as a result of polyploidy, a 
condition in which an organism has extra sets of chromo-
somes. Sympatric speciation also can result from sexual selec-
tion. Finally, sympatric speciation can occur when a subset 
of a population becomes reproductively isolated because of 
natural selection that results from a switch to a habitat or 
food source not used by the parent population.
Having reviewed the geographic context in which species 
originate, we’ll next explore in more detail what can happen 
when new or partially formed species come into contact.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Anole Lizards:  
An Example of Speciation      
CONCEPT CHECK 24.2
1. Summarize key differences between allopatric and sympatric 
speciation. Which type of speciation is more common, and why?
2. Describe two mechanisms that can decrease gene flow in 
sympatric populations, thereby making sympatric speciation 
more likely to occur.
3. WHAT IF? Is allopatric speciation more likely to occur on an 
island close to a mainland or on a more isolated island of 
the same size? Explain your prediction.
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the process of meiosis in 
Figure 13.8. Describe how an error during meiosis could lead 
to polyploidy.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 24.3
Hybrid zones reveal factors that 
cause reproductive isolation
What happens if species with incomplete reproductive bar-
riers come into contact with one another? One possible out-
come is the formation of a hybrid zone, a region in which 
members of different species meet and mate, producing at 
least some offspring of mixed ancestry. In this section, we’ll 
explore hybrid zones and what they reveal about factors that 
cause the evolution of reproductive isolation.
Patterns Within Hybrid Zones
Some hybrid zones form as narrow bands, such as the  
one depicted in Figure 24.13 for the yellow-bellied toad 
(Bombina variegata) and its close relative, the fire-bellied toad  
(B. bombina). This hybrid zone, represented by the red line 
on the map, extends for 4,000 km but is less than 10 km wide 
in most places. The hybrid zone occurs where the higher-
altitude habitat of the yellow-bellied toad meets the lowland 
habitat of the fire-bellied toad. Across a given “slice” of the 
zone, the frequency of alleles specific to yellow-bellied toads 
typically decreases from close to 100% at the edge where only 
yellow-bellied toads are found to around 50% in the central 
portion of the zone and to close to 0% at the edge where only 
fire-bellied toads are found.
What causes such a pattern of allele frequencies across a 
hybrid zone? We can infer that there is an obstacle to gene 
flow—otherwise, alleles from one parent species would also 
be common in the gene pool of the other parent species. Are 
geographic barriers reducing gene flow? Not in this case, 
since the toads can move throughout the hybrid zone. A 
more important factor is that hybrid toads have increased 
rates of embryonic mortality and a variety of morphological 
abnormalities, including ribs that are fused to the spine and 
malformed tadpole mouthparts. Because the hybrids have 
poor survival and reproduction, they produce few viable off-
spring with members of the parent species. As a result, hybrid 
individuals rarely serve as a stepping-stone from which alleles 
are passed from one species to the other. Outside the hybrid 
zone, additional obstacles to gene flow may be provided by 
natural selection in the different environments in which the 
parent species live.
Hybrid zones typically are located wherever the habitats 
of the interbreeding species meet. Those regions often 
resemble a group of isolated patches scattered across the 
landscape—more like the pattern of spots on a Dalmatian 
than the continuous band shown in Figure 24.13. But regard-
less of whether they have complex or simple spatial patterns, 
hybrid zones form when two species lacking complete barri-
ers to reproduction come into contact. What happens when 
the habitats of the interbreeding species change over time?
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   572 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 574 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 573
1.0
0
40 30 20 10 0 10 20
Distance from hybrid zone center (km)
Frequency of B. variegata-specific alleles
0.75
0.5
0.25
Yellow-bellied toad,
Bombina variegata: 
lives at higher altitudes
Fire-bellied toad,
Bombina bombina:
lives at 
lower altitudes
Yellow-bellied 
toad range
Fire-bellied 
toad range
Hybrid zone (red line)
occurs where the habitats
of the two species meet.
Hybrid zone
Yellow-bellied
toad range
Fire-bellied
toad range
Hybrid
zone
m Figure 24.13 A narrow 
hybrid zone for Bombina 
toads in Europe. The graph 
shows species-specific allele 
frequencies across the width of 
the zone near Krakow, Poland, 
averaged over six genetic loci. 
A value of 1.0 indicates that 
all individuals were yellow-
bellied toads, 0 indicates that all 
individuals were fire-bellied toads, 
and intermediate frequencies 
indicate that some individuals 
were of mixed ancestry.
?  Does the graph indicate that 
gene flow is spreading fire-bellied 
toad alleles into the range of the 
yellow-bellied toad? Explain.
Hybrid Zones and Environmental Change
A change in environmental conditions can alter where the 
habitats of interbreeding species meet. When this happens, 
an existing hybrid zone can move to a new location, or a 
novel hybrid zone may form.
For example, black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus) 
and Carolina chickadees (P. carolinensis) interbreed in a 
narrow hybrid zone that runs from New Jersey to Kansas. 
Recent studies have shown that the location of this hybrid 
zone has shifted northward as the climate has warmed 
(Figure 24.14). In another example, a series of warm win-
ters prior to 2003 enabled the southern flying squirrel 
(Glaucomys volans) to expand northward into the range of 
the northern flying squirrel, G. sabrinus. Previously, the 
ranges of these two species had not overlapped. Genetic 
analyses showed that these flying squirrels began to hybrid-
ize where their ranges came into contact, thereby forming a 
novel hybrid zone induced by climate change.
Finally, note that a hybrid zone can be a source of novel 
genetic variation that improves the ability of one or both parent 
species to cope with changing environmental conditions. This 
can occur when an allele found only in one parent species is trans-
ferred first to hybrid individuals and then to the other parent spe-
cies when hybrids breed with the second parent species. Recent 
genetic analyses have shown that hybridization has been a source 
for such novel genetic variation in some insect, mammal, bird, 
and plant species. In the Problem-Solving Exercise, you can exam-
ine one such example: a case in which hybridization may have led 
to the transfer of  insecticide-resistance alleles between species of 
mosquitoes that transmit malaria.
(a)  Black-capped chickadee 
(Poecile atricapillus)
(b) Carolina chickadee (Poecile 
carolinensis)
. Figure 24.14 A shift in a hybrid zone resulting from 
climate change. Black-capped (a) and Carolina chickadees  
(b) interbreed in a hybrid zone that runs from Kansas to New 
Jersey. In Pennsylvania, the center of this hybrid zone moved 
12 km to the north from 2002 to 2012. This shift is consistent 
with predictions based on the warmer winter temperatures that 
have resulted from climate change.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   573 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 575 ===

574 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
In this exercise, you will investigate whether alleles encoding resistance to insecticides 
have been transferred between closely related species of Anopheles.
Your Approach The principle guiding your investigation is that DNA analyses can 
detect the transfer of resistance alleles between closely related mosquito species. To 
find out whether such transfers have occurred, you will analyze DNA results from two 
species of mosquitoes that transmit malaria (Anopheles gambiae and A. coluzzii) and 
from A. gambiae * A. coluzzii hybrids.
Your Data Resistance to DDT and other insecticides in Anopheles is affected by 
a sodium channel gene, kdr. The r allele of this gene confers resistance, while the 
wild-type (+/+) genotype is not resistant. Researchers sequenced the kdr gene from 
mosquitoes collected in Mali during three time periods: pre-2006 (2002 and 2004), 
2006, and post-2006 (2009–2012). A. gambiae and A. coluzzii were collected dur-
ing all three time periods, but their hybrids only occurred in 2006, the first year that 
insecticide-treated bed nets were used to reduce the spread of malaria. A likely ex-
planation is that the introduction of the treated bed nets may have briefly favored 
hybrid individuals, which are usually at a selective disadvantage.
Observed numbers of mosquitoes by kdr genotype
1/11 /rr /r
A. gambiae: 
Pre-2006
2006
Post-2006
3
8
3
5
8
3
2
7
57
Hybrids: 2006 10 70
A. coluzzii: 
Pre-2006
2006
Post-2006
226
70
79
0
7
127
0
0
94
Your Analysis
1.  (a) Calculate the kdr genotype frequencies in A. gambiae for each time period. 
To do this, divide the number of individuals that have a given genotype by the 
total number of individuals observed for that time period. (b) How did the kdr 
genotype frequencies change over time? Describe a hypothesis that accounts for 
these observations.
2.  How did the frequencies of kdr genotypes change over time in A. coluzzii? 
Describe a hypothesis that accounts for these observations.
3.  Do these results indicate that hybridization can lead to the transfer of adaptive 
alleles? Explain.
4.  Predict how the transfer of the r allele to A. coluzzii populations could affect 
the number of malaria cases in the years immediately following the transfer.
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Is hybridization promoting 
insecticide resistance in 
mosquitoes that transmit 
malaria?
Malaria is a leading cause of human illness 
and mortality worldwide, with 200 million 
people infected and 600,000 deaths each year. 
In the 1960s, the incidence of malaria was 
reduced, owing to the use of insecticides that 
killed mosquitoes in the genus Anopheles, 
which transmit the disease from person to 
person. But today, mosquitoes are becoming 
resistant to insecticides—causing a resurgence 
in malaria.
Insecticide-treated bed nets have helped 
reduce cases of malaria in many countries, but 
resistance to insecticides is rising in mosquito 
populations.
  Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving Exercise 
can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
Hybrid Zones over Time
Studying a hybrid zone is like observing a naturally occurring 
experiment on speciation. Will the hybrids become reproduc-
tively isolated from their parents and form a new species? This 
has occurred by polyploid speciation in some cases, as we saw for 
the formation of two new species of goatsbeard plants (see Figure 
24.11). Hybridization also has led to what may turn out to be a 
new species of finch in the Galápagos archipelago: A 2018 study 
found that descendants of hybrids between the large cactus finch 
(Geospiza conirostris) and the medium ground finch (G. fortis) are 
becoming reproductively isolated from both parent species. As of 
2019, this emerging species is known informally as “Big Bird.”
In other cases, however, interspecific hybrids do not 
become reproductively isolated from their parent species. 
In such situations, there are three common outcomes for a 
hybrid zone over time: reinforcement of barriers, fusion of 
species, or stability (Figure 24.15). Let’s examine what studies 
suggest about these possibilities.
Reinforcement: Strengthening Reproductive Barriers
Hybrids often are less fit than members of their parent spe-
cies. In such cases, natural selection should strengthen prezy-
gotic barriers to reproduction, reducing the formation of 
unfit hybrids. Because this process involves reinforcing repro-
ductive barriers, it is called reinforcement. If reinforcement 
is occurring, a logical prediction is that barriers to reproduc-
tion between species should be stronger for sympatric popula-
tions than for allopatric populations.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   574 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 576 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 575
Population
Barrier to
gene flow
Hybrid
individual
Hybrid
zone
Gene flow
     Three
populations
of a species
are connected
by gene flow.
1
     A barrier
to gene flow
is established.
2
     Gene flow is
re-established in
a hybrid zone.
4
     Possible outcomes for hybrids:
Reinforcement
(strengthening
of reproductive
barriers—hybrids
gradually cease
to be formed)
Fusion
(weakening of
reproductive
barriers—the
two species fuse)
Stability
(continued
production of
hybrid individuals)
OR
OR
5
     This population
begins to diverge
from the other 
two populations.
3
. Figure 24.15 Formation of a hybrid zone and common outcomes for hybrids over time. 
The thick gray and purple arrows represent the passage of time.
WHAT IF? Predict what might happen if gene flow were re-established 
at step 3 in this process.
As an example, let’s consider two species of European fly-
catcher, the pied flycatcher (Ficedula hypoleuca) and the col-
lared flycatcher (Ficedula albicollis). In allopatric populations 
of these birds, males of the two species closely resemble one 
another, while in sympatric populations, the males look very 
different. Female flycatchers do not select males of the other 
species when given a choice between males from sympatric 
populations, but they frequently do make mistakes when 
selecting between males from allopatric populations. Thus, 
barriers to reproduction are stronger in birds from sympatric 
populations than in birds from allopatric populations, as you 
would predict if reinforcement were occurring. Similar results 
have been observed in a number of organisms, including 
some fishes, insects, plants, and other birds.
Fusion: Weakening Reproductive Barriers
Barriers to reproduction may be weak when two species meet 
in a hybrid zone. Indeed, so much gene flow may occur that 
reproductive barriers weaken further and the gene pools of 
the two species become increasingly alike. In effect, the spe-
ciation process reverses, eventually causing the two hybrid-
izing species to fuse into a single species.
For example, genetic and morphological evidence indi-
cates that the recent loss of the large tree finch from the 
Galápagos island of Floreana resulted from extensive hybrid-
ization with another finch species on that island. Such a 
situation also may be occurring among Lake Victoria cich-
lids (Figure 24.16). Many pairs of ecologically similar cichlid 
species are reproductively isolated because the females of 
one species prefer to mate with males of one color, while 
females of the other species prefer to mate with males of 
a different color (see Figure 24.12). Results from field and 
laboratory studies indicate that murky waters caused by 
Pundamilia nyererei Pundamilia pundamilia
Pundamilia ”turbid water,”
hybrid offspring from a location
with turbid water
. Figure 24.16 Fusion: the breakdown of reproductive barriers. 
Increasingly cloudy water in Lake Victoria over the past several decades 
may have weakened reproductive barriers between P. nyererei and  
P. pundamilia. In areas of cloudy water, the two species have hybridized 
extensively, causing their gene pools to fuse.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   575 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 577 ===

576 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
the adaptations of organisms (see Concept 21.2). But biolo-
gists since Darwin have continued to ask fundamental ques-
tions about speciation. How long does it take for new species 
to form? And how many genes change when one species 
splits into two? Answers to these questions are also emerging.
The Time Course of Speciation
We can gather information about how long it takes new spe-
cies to form from broad patterns in the fossil record and from 
studies that use morphological data (including fossils) or 
molecular data to assess the time interval between speciation 
events in particular groups of organisms.
Patterns in the Fossil Record
The fossil record includes many episodes in which new spe-
cies appear suddenly in a geologic stratum, persist essentially 
unchanged through several strata, and then disappear. For 
example, there are dozens of species of marine invertebrates 
that make their debut in the fossil record with novel mor-
phologies, but then change little for millions of years before 
becoming extinct. The term punctuated equilibria is used 
to describe these periods of apparent stasis punctuated by 
sudden change (Figure 24.17a). Other species do not show 
a punctuated pattern; instead, they appear to have changed 
more gradually over long periods of time (Figure 24.17b).
What might punctuated and gradual patterns tell us about 
how long it takes new species to form? Suppose that a species 
survived for 5 million years, but most of the morphological 
changes that caused it to be designated a new species occurred 
during its first 50,000 years—just 1% of the total existence of 
pollution have reduced the ability of females to use color to 
distinguish males of their own species from males of closely 
related species. In some polluted waters, many hybrids have 
been produced, leading to fusion of the parent species’ gene 
pools and a loss of species.
Stability: Continued Formation of Hybrid Individuals
Many hybrid zones are stable in the sense that hybrids con-
tinue to be produced. In some cases, this occurs because the 
hybrids survive or reproduce better than members of either 
parent species, at least in certain habitats or years. But stable 
hybrid zones have also been observed in cases where the 
hybrids are selected against—an unexpected result.
For example, hybrids continue to form in the Bombina 
hybrid zone even though they are strongly selected against. 
One explanation relates to the narrowness of the Bombina 
hybrid zone (see Figure 24.13). Evidence suggests that mem-
bers of both parent species migrate into the zone from the 
parent populations located outside the zone, thus leading to 
the continued production of hybrids. If the hybrid zone were 
wider, this would be less likely to occur, since the center of 
the zone would receive little gene flow from distant parent 
populations located outside the hybrid zone.
Sometimes the outcomes in hybrid zones match our 
predictions (European flycatchers and cichlid fishes), and 
sometimes they don’t (Bombina). But whether our predictions 
are upheld or not, events in hybrid zones can shed light on 
how barriers to reproduction between closely related species 
change over time. In the next section, we’ll examine how 
interactions between hybridizing species can also provide a 
glimpse into the speed and genetic control of speciation.
CONCEPT CHECK 24.3
1. What are hybrid zones, and why can they be viewed as 
“natural laboratories” in which to study speciation?
2. WHAT IF? Consider two species that diverged while geo-
graphically separated but resumed contact before reproduc-
tive isolation was complete. Predict the outcome over time 
if the two species mated indiscriminately and (a) hybrid 
offspring survived and reproduced more poorly than offspring 
from intraspecific matings or (b) hybrid offspring survived and 
reproduced as well as offspring from intraspecific matings.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 24.4
Speciation can occur rapidly 
or slowly and can result from 
changes in few or many genes
Darwin faced many questions when he began to ponder that 
“mystery of mysteries”—speciation. He found answers to 
some of those questions when he realized that evolution by 
natural selection helps explain both the diversity of life and 
(a) Punctuated model. New species change most as they branch from a 
parent species and then change little for the rest of their existence.
(b) Gradual model. Species diverge from one another more slowly and 
steadily over time.
Time
. Figure 24.17 Two models for the tempo of speciation.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   576 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 578 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 577
the species. Time periods this short (in geologic terms) often 
cannot be distinguished in fossil strata, in part because the 
rate of sediment accumulation may be too slow to separate 
layers this close in time. Thus, based on its fossils, the species 
would seem to have appeared suddenly and then lingered 
with little or no change before becoming extinct. Even though 
such a species may have originated more slowly than its fossils 
suggest (in this case taking up to 50,000 years), a punctuated 
pattern indicates that speciation occurred relatively rapidly. 
For species whose fossils changed much more gradually, we 
also cannot tell exactly when a new biological species formed, 
since information about reproductive isolation does not fos-
silize. However, it is likely that speciation in such groups 
occurred relatively slowly, perhaps taking millions of years.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Stephen Jay Gould: An “archi-
tect” of the concept of punctuated equilibria
Speciation Rates
The existence of fossils that display a punctuated pattern 
suggests that once the process of speciation begins, it can 
be completed relatively rapidly—a suggestion supported 
by many studies. For example, rapid speciation appears to 
have produced the wild sunflower Helianthus anomalus. 
Genetic evidence indicates that this species originated by 
the hybridization of two other sunflower species, H. annuus 
and H. petiolaris. The hybrid species H. anomalus is ecologi-
cally distinct and reproductively isolated from both parent 
species (Figure 24.18). Unlike the outcome of allopolyploid 
speciation, in which there is a change in chromosome num-
ber after hybridization, in these sunflowers the two parent 
species and the hybrid all have the same number of chro-
mosomes (2n = 34). How, then, did speciation occur? To 
study this question, researchers performed an experiment 
designed to mimic events in nature (Figure 24.19). Their 
results indicated that natural selection could produce exten-
sive genetic changes in hybrid populations over short periods 
of time. These changes appear to have caused the hybrids to 
diverge reproductively from their parents and form a new 
species, H. anomalus.
. Figure 24.18 A hybrid sunflower species and its dry sand 
dune habitat. The wild sunflower Helianthus anomalus shown here 
originated via the hybridization of two other sunflowers, H. annuus 
and H. petiolaris, which live in nearby but moister environments.
Experiment Loren Rieseberg and his colleagues crossed the 
two parent sunflower species, H. annuus and H. petiolaris, 
to produce experimental hybrids in the laboratory (for each 
gamete, only two of the n = 17 chromosomes are shown).
H. annuus
gamete
H. petiolarus
gamete
F1 experimental hybrid
(4 of the 2n = 34
chromosomes are shown)
Note that in the first (F1) generation, each chromosome of 
the experimental hybrids consisted entirely of DNA from 
one or the other parent species. The researchers then tested 
whether the F1 and subsequent generations of experimental 
hybrids were fertile. They also used species-specific genetic 
markers to compare the chromosomes in the experimental 
hybrids with the chromosomes in the naturally occurring 
hybrid H. anomalus.
Results A l t h o u g h  o n l y  5 %  o f  t h e  F1 experimental hybrids 
were fertile, after just four more generations the hybrid fer-
tility rose to more than 90%. The chromosomes of individu-
als from this fifth hybrid generation differed from those in 
the F1 generation (see above) but were similar to those in  
H. anomalus individuals from natural populations:
Experimental hybrid
Experimental hybrid
H. anomalus
H. anomalus
Chromosome 2
Chromosome 1
Comparison region containing H. annuus–specific marker
Comparison region containing H. petiolarus–specific marker
Conclusion Over time, the chromosomes in the population 
of experimental hybrids became similar to the chromosomes 
of H. anomalus individuals from natural populations. This 
suggests that the observed rise in the fertility of the experi-
mental hybrids may have occurred as selection eliminated 
regions of DNA from the parent species that were not com-
patible with one another. Overall, it appeared that the initial 
steps of the speciation process occurred rapidly and could be 
mimicked in a laboratory experiment.
Data from L. H. Rieseberg et al., Role of gene interactions in hybrid speciation: 
evidence from ancient and experimental hybrids, Science 272:741–745 (1996).
WHAT IF? The increased fertility of the experimental hybrids could 
have resulted from natural selection for thriving under laboratory 
conditions. Evaluate this alternative explanation for the result.
How does hybridization lead to speciation in 
sunflowers?
/uni25BC Figure 24.19 Inquiry
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   577 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 579 ===

578 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
The two monkey flower species are visited by different 
pollinators: Hummingbirds prefer the red-flowered  
M. cardinalis, and bumblebees prefer the pink-flowered  
M. lewisii. Pollinator choice is affected by at least two loci in 
the monkey flowers, one of which, the “yellow upper,” or 
yup, locus, influences flower color (Figure 24.20). By cross-
ing the two parent species to produce F1 hybrids and then 
performing repeated backcrosses of these F1 hybrids to each 
parent species, researchers succeeded in transferring the M. 
cardinalis allele at this locus into M. lewisii, and vice versa. In 
a field experiment, M. lewisii plants with the M. cardinalis yup 
allele received 68-fold more visits from hummingbirds than 
did wild-type M. lewisii. Similarly, M. cardinalis plants with 
the M. lewisii yup allele received 74-fold more visits from bum-
blebees than did wild-type M. cardinalis. Thus, a mutation at 
a single locus can influence pollinator preference and hence 
contribute to reproductive isolation in monkey flowers.
In other organisms, the speciation process is influenced by 
larger numbers of genes and gene interactions. For example, 
hybrid sterility between two subspecies of the fruit fly Drosophila 
pseudoobscura results from gene interactions among at least four  
loci, and postzygotic isolation in the sunflower hybrid zone 
The sunflower example, along with the apple maggot fly, 
Lake Victoria cichlid, and fruit fly examples discussed earlier, 
suggests that new species can arise rapidly once divergence begins. 
But what is the total length of time between speciation events? 
This interval consists of the time that elapses before populations 
of a newly formed species start to diverge from one another plus 
the time it takes for speciation to be complete once divergence 
begins. It turns out that the total time between speciation events 
varies considerably. In a survey of data from 84 groups of plants 
and animals, speciation intervals ranged from 4,000 years (in 
cichlids of Lake Nabugabo, Uganda) to 40 million years (in some 
beetles). Overall, the time between speciation events averaged 
6.5 million years and was rarely less than 500,000 years.
These data suggest that on average, millions of years may 
pass before a newly formed plant or animal species will itself 
give rise to another new species. As you’ll read in Concept 25.4,  
this finding has implications for how long it takes life on Earth 
to recover from mass extinction events. Moreover, the extreme 
variability in the time it takes new species to form indicates 
that organisms do not have an internal “speciation clock” 
that causes them to produce new species at regular intervals. 
Instead, speciation begins only after gene flow between popu-
lations is interrupted, perhaps by changing environmental 
conditions or by unpredictable events, such as a storm that 
transports a few individuals to a new area. Furthermore, 
once gene flow is interrupted, the populations must diverge 
genetically to such an extent that they become reproductively 
 isolated—all before other events cause gene flow to resume, 
possibly reversing the speciation process (see Figure 24.16).
Studying the Genetics of Speciation
Studies of ongoing speciation (as in hybrid zones) can reveal 
traits that cause reproductive isolation. By identifying the 
genes that control those traits, scientists can explore a funda-
mental question of evolutionary biology: How many genes 
influence the formation of new species?
In some cases, the evolution of reproductive isolation results 
from the effects of a single gene. For example, in Japanese 
snails of the genus Euhadra, a change in a single gene results in 
a mechanical barrier to reproduction. This gene controls the 
direction in which the shells spiral. When their shells spiral in 
different directions, the snails’ genitalia are oriented in a man-
ner that prevents mating (Figure 24.3f and g show a similar 
example). Recent genetic analyses have uncovered other single 
genes that cause reproductive isolation in fruit flies or mice.
A major barrier to reproduction between two closely related 
species of monkey flower, Mimulus cardinalis and M. lewisii, 
also appears to be influenced by a relatively small number of 
genes. These two species are isolated by several prezygotic and 
postzygotic barriers. Of these, one prezygotic barrier, pollina-
tor choice, accounts for most of the isolation: In a hybrid zone 
between M. cardinalis and M. lewisii, nearly 98% of pollinator 
visits were restricted to one species or the other.
Typical Mimulus lewisii (b)M. lewisii with an M. 
cardinalis flower-color 
allele
(c)Typical Mimulus 
cardinalis
(d) M. cardinalis with an M. 
lewisii flower-color allele
(a)
. Figure 24.20 A locus that influences pollinator choice. 
Pollinator preferences provide a strong barrier to reproduction 
between Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis. After transferring the  
M. lewisii allele for a flower-color locus into M. cardinalis and vice 
versa, researchers observed a shift in some pollinators’ preferences.
WHAT IF? If M. cardinalis individuals that had the M. lewisii yup allele 
were planted in an area that housed both monkey flower species, how 
might the production of hybrid offspring be affected?
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   578 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 580 ===

 CHAPTER 24  Species and Speciation 579
many such speciation and extinction events have helped shape 
the sweeping evolutionary changes that are documented in the 
fossil record. In the next chapter, we turn to such large-scale 
evolutionary changes as we begin our study of macroevolution.
discussed earlier is influenced by at least 26 chromosome seg-
ments (and an unknown number of genes). Overall, studies sug-
gest that few or many genes can influence the evolution of repro-
ductive isolation and hence the emergence of a new species.
From Speciation to Macroevolution
As you’ve seen, speciation may begin with differences as small as 
the color on a cichlid’s back. However, as speciation occurs again 
and again, such differences can accumulate and become more 
pronounced, eventually leading to the formation of new groups 
of organisms that differ greatly from their ancestors (as in the 
origin of whales from terrestrial mammals; see Figure 21.20).  
Moreover, as one group of organisms increases in size by pro-
ducing many new species, another group of organisms may 
shrink, losing species to extinction. The cumulative effects of 
24 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
• In sympatric speciation, a new species originates while 
remaining in the same geographic area as the parent species. 
Plant species (and, more rarely, animal species) have evolved 
sympatrically through polyploidy. Sympatric speciation can 
also result from sexual selection and habitat shifts.
? Can factors that cause sympatric speciation also cause allopatric 
speciation? Explain.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 24.1
The biological species concept emphasizes 
reproductive isolation (pp. 563–566)
• A biological species is a group of populations whose  
individuals may interbreed and produce viable, fertile  
offspring with each other but not with members of other  
species.
• New species form when reproductive isolation  
between populations develops through the establishment  
of prezygotic or postzygotic barriers that separate  
gene pools.
? Explain the role of gene flow in the biological species concept.
CONCEPT 24.2
Speciation can take place with or without geographic 
separation (pp. 567–572)
• In allopatric speciation, gene flow is reduced when two popu-
lations of one species become geographically separated from 
each other. One or both populations may undergo evolutionary 
change during the period of separation, resulting in the establish-
ment of barriers to reproduction.
Allopatric
speciation
Sympatric
speciation
Original
population
CONCEPT 24.3
Hybrid zones reveal factors that cause reproductive 
isolation (pp. 572–576)
• Many groups of organisms form hybrid zones in which mem-
bers of different species meet and mate, producing at least some 
offspring of mixed ancestry.
• Many hybrid zones are stable, in that hybrid offspring  
continue to be produced over time. In others, reinforcement 
strengthens prezygotic barriers to reproduction, thus decreasing 
the formation of unfit hybrids. In still other hybrid zones,  
barriers to reproduction may weaken over time, resulting in  
the fusion of the species’ gene pools (reversing the speciation 
process).
? What factors can support the long-term stability of a hybrid zone if 
the parent species live in different environments?
CONCEPT 24.4
Speciation can occur rapidly or slowly and can result 
from changes in few or many genes (pp. 576–579)
• New species can form rapidly once divergence begins, but it can 
take millions of years for that to happen. The time interval be-
tween speciation events varies considerably, from a few thousand 
years to tens of millions of years.
• Researchers have identified particular genes involved in some 
cases of speciation. Speciation can be driven by a few or many 
genes.
? Is speciation something that happened only in the distant past, or 
are new species continuing to arise today? Explain.
CONCEPT CHECK 24.4
1. Speciation can occur rapidly between diverging popula-
tions, yet the time between speciation events is often more 
than a million years. Explain this apparent contradiction.
2. Summarize evidence that the yup locus acts as a prezygotic 
barrier to reproduction in two species of monkey flowers. 
Do these results show that the yup locus alone controls bar-
riers to reproduction between these species? Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare Figures 13.12 and 24.19. 
What cellular process could cause the hybrid chromosomes in 
Figure 24.19 to have DNA from both parent species? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   579 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 581 ===

580 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INFORMATION In sexually 
reproducing species, each individual inherits DNA from both 
parent organisms. In a short essay (100–150 words), apply this 
idea to what occurs when organisms of two species that have 
homologous chromosomes mate and produce (F1) hybrid 
offspring. What percentage of the DNA in the F1 hybrids’ 
chromosomes comes from each parent species? As the hybrids 
mate and produce F2 and later-generation hybrid offspring, 
describe how recombination and natural selection may affect 
whether the DNA in hybrid chromosomes is derived from one 
parent species or the other.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Suppose that females of one population of strawberry 
poison dart frogs (Dendrobates pumilio) prefer to mate 
with males that are orange-red in color. In a different 
population, females prefer males with yellow skin. Explain 
how such differences could arise and how they could affect 
the evolution of reproductive isolation in allopatric versus 
sympatric populations.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Explain the biological basis for 
assigning all human populations to a single species. Can you 
think of a scenario by which a second human species could 
originate in the future?
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT In this chapter, you read 
that bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) is an allohexaploid, 
containing two sets of chromosomes from each of three 
different parent species. Genetic analysis suggests that 
each of the three species pictured following this question 
contributed chromosome sets to T. aestivum. (The capital letters 
represent sets of chromosomes, each of which can be traced 
to a particular species, not individual genes. The numbers in 
parentheses are the species’ chromosome numbers.) Evidence 
also indicates that the first polyploidy event began with the 
spontaneous hybridization of the early cultivated wheat species 
T. monococcum and a wild Triticum grass species. Draw a diagram 
of one possible chain of events that could have produced the 
allohexaploid T. aestivum.
Ancestral species:
Product:
AA
Triticum
monococcum
(14)
Wild
Triticum
(14)
Wild
T. tauschii
(14)
BB
T. aestivum
(bread wheat)
(42)
AA BB DD
DD
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–6 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C24_PRF.indd   580 3/14/20   2:54 AM

=== SIDE 582 ===

581
Figure 25.1 In the 1870s, researchers working in the searing heat of the Sahara 
Desert were startled to discover fossils of ancient whales. These fossils were 
spectacular not only for where they were found, but also for documenting the 
transition from life on land to life in the sea—just one example of the sweeping 
changes seen in the history of life on Earth.
Macroevolution25
How has life on Earth changed over time?
Large-scale 
processes that 
cause changes 
over time:
Land masses move 
over time, affecting 
extinction and 
speciation rates.
Many species 
become extinct 
worldwide.
A lineage gives rise
to many new species.
Continental drift Mass extinction Adaptive radiation
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
†Common
ancestor
Younger stratum
Older stratum
As documented by 
the fossil record… …groups of organisms arise, 
diversify, and fall over time.
Lineage
ending in
extinction
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 25
• Figure 25.10 Walkthrough: Serial 
Endosymbiosis
• HHMI Video: The Making of the Fittest
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Visualizing the Scale of 
Geologic Time
• HHMI Video: The Day the Mesozoic Died
25.1 Conditions on early Earth made the 
origin of life possible p. 582
25.2 The fossil record documents the 
history of life p. 584
25.3 Key events in life’s history include 
the origins of unicellular and 
multicellular organisms and the 
colonization of land p. 588
25.4 The rise and fall of groups of 
organisms reflect differences in 
speciation and extinction rates p .  5 9 3
25.5 Major changes in body form 
can result from changes in the 
sequences and regulation of 
developmental genes p. 600
25.6 Evolution is not goal oriented p. 603
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Draw a time line: Draw a time line like 
the example shown here, and mark when 
the following key evolutionary events 
occurred: “oxygen revolution,” origin of 
eukaryotes, first multicellular organisms, 
colonization of land by large eukaryotes, 
origin of tetrapods, and the Permian mass 
extinction. Briefly describe the significance 
of each event. You can also add more 
events to your time line as you study.
4 bya
3.5 bya
Present
(Life on Earth begins;
all early cells are prokaryotes)
First unicellular organisms
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   581 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 583 ===

582 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
with compounds released by volcanic eruptions, such as 
nitrogen and its oxides, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, 
and hydrogen. As Earth cooled, the water vapor condensed 
into oceans, and much of the hydrogen escaped into space.
During the 1920s, Russian chemist A. I. Oparin and British 
scientist J. B. S. Haldane independently hypothesized that 
Earth’s early atmosphere was a reducing (electron-adding) 
environment, in which organic compounds could have 
formed from simpler molecules. The energy for this synthesis 
could have come from lightning and UV radiation. Haldane 
suggested that the early oceans were a solution of organic 
molecules, a “primitive soup” from which life arose.
In 1953, Stanley Miller, working with Harold Urey at the 
University of Chicago, tested the Oparin-Haldane hypoth-
esis by creating laboratory conditions comparable to those 
that scientists at the time thought existed on early Earth (see 
Figure 4.2). His apparatus yielded a variety of amino acids 
found in organisms today, along with other organic com-
pounds. Many laboratories have since repeated Miller’s classic 
experiment using different recipes for the atmosphere, some 
of which also produced organic compounds.
However, some evidence suggests that the early atmosphere 
was made up primarily of nitrogen and carbon dioxide and was 
neither reducing nor oxidizing (electron removing). Recent 
Miller/Urey-type experiments using such “neutral” atmo-
spheres have also produced organic molecules. In addition, 
small pockets of the early atmosphere, such as those near the 
openings of volcanoes, may have been reducing. Perhaps the 
first organic compounds formed near volcanoes. In a test of this 
hypothesis (Figure 25.2), researchers used modern equipment 
Conditions on early Earth made 
the origin of life possible
Direct evidence of life on early Earth comes from fossils of 
microorganisms that lived 3.5 billion years ago. But how did 
the first living cells appear? Observations and experiments in 
chemistry, geology, and physics have led scientists to propose 
one scenario that we’ll examine here. They hypothesize that 
chemical and physical processes could have produced simple 
cells through a sequence of four main stages:
1. The abiotic (nonliving) synthesis of small organic mol-
ecules, such as amino acids and nitrogenous bases
2. The joining of these small molecules into macromol-
ecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids
3. The packaging of these molecules into protocells, drop-
lets with membranes that maintained an internal chem-
istry different from that of their surroundings
4. The origin of self-replicating molecules that eventually 
made inheritance possible
Though speculative, this scenario leads to predictions that 
can be tested in the laboratory. In this section, we’ll examine 
some of the evidence for each stage.
Synthesis of Organic Compounds  
on Early Earth
Our planet formed 4.6 billion years ago, condensing from a 
vast cloud of dust and rocks that surrounded the young sun. 
For its first few hundred million years, Earth was bombarded 
by huge chunks of rock and ice left over from the formation 
of the solar system. The collisions generated so much heat 
that all of the available water was vaporized, preventing the 
formation of seas and lakes.
This massive bombardment ended 4 billion years ago, set-
ting the stage for the origin of life. The first atmosphere had 
little oxygen and was likely thick with water vapor, along 
The whale fossils discovered in the Sahara Desert (see 
Figure 25.1) are one example of evidence that past organisms 
were very different from those presently living. The sweeping 
changes in life on Earth as revealed by such fossils illustrate 
macroevolution, the broad pattern of evolution above the 
species level. Examples of macroevolutionary change include 
the emergence of terrestrial vertebrates through a series of 
speciation events, the impact of mass extinctions on biodi-
versity, and the origin of key adaptations such as flight.
Taken together, such changes provide a grand view of the 
evolutionary history of life. We’ll examine that history in this 
chapter, beginning with a discussion of hypotheses regarding 
the origin of life. This is the most speculative topic of the entire 
unit, because no fossil evidence of that seminal episode exists.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain  
how more than 20 amino acids  
could have been obtained in  
the 2008 study. (See Concept 5.4.)
Number of amino acids0
20
       10
1953 2008
Mass of amino acids (mg)0
200
       100
1953 2008
. Figure 25.2 Amino acid synthesis in a simulated volcanic 
eruption. In addition to his classic 1953 study, Miller also 
conducted an experiment simulating a volcanic eruption. In a 2008 
reanalysis of those results, researchers found that far more amino 
acids were produced under simulated volcanic conditions than 
were produced in the conditions of the classic 1953 study.
CONCEPT 25.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   582 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 584 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 583
macromolecules, including enzymes and other proteins and 
the nucleic acids needed for self-replication. Could such mac-
romolecules have formed on early Earth? A 2016 study dem-
onstrated that one key step, the abiotic synthesis of RNA’s 
two purine bases, adenine (A) and guanine (G), can occur 
spontaneously from simple precursor molecules; the abiotic 
synthesis of the smaller cytosine (C) and uracil (U) bases was 
accomplished in 2009. In addition, by dripping solutions of 
amino acids or RNA nucleotides onto hot sand, clay, or rock, 
researchers have produced polymers of these molecules. 
The polymers formed spontaneously, without the help of 
enzymes or ribosomes. Unlike proteins, the amino acid poly-
mers are a complex mix of linked and cross-linked amino 
acids. Still, it is possible that such polymers acted as weak 
catalysts for a variety of chemical reactions on early Earth.
Protocells
All organisms must be able to carry out both reproduction 
and energy processing (metabolism). DNA molecules carry 
genetic information, including the instructions needed to 
replicate themselves accurately during reproduction. But 
DNA replication requires elaborate enzymatic machinery, 
along with an abundant supply of nucleotide building blocks 
provided by the cell’s metabolism. This suggests that self-
replicating molecules and a metabolic source of building 
blocks may have appeared together in early protocells. The 
necessary conditions may have been met in vesicles, fluid-
filled compartments enclosed by a membrane-like structure. 
Recent experiments show that abiotically produced vesicles 
can exhibit certain properties of life, including simple repro-
duction and metabolism, as well as the maintenance of an 
internal chemical environment different from that of their 
surroundings (Figure 25.4).
For example, vesicles can form spontaneously when lipids 
or other organic molecules are added to water. When this 
occurs, molecules that have both a hydrophobic region and a 
hydrophilic region can organize into a bilayer similar to the 
lipid bilayer of a plasma membrane. Adding substances such 
as montmorillonite, a soft mineral clay produced by the weath-
ering of volcanic ash, greatly increases the rate of vesicle 
self-assembly (see Figure 25.4a). This clay, which is thought 
to have been common on early Earth, provides surfaces on 
which organic molecules become concentrated, increasing 
the likelihood that the molecules will react with each other 
and form vesicles. Abiotically produced vesicles can “repro-
duce” on their own (see Figure 25.4b), and they can increase 
in size (“grow”) without dilution of their contents. Vesicles 
also can absorb montmorillonite particles, including those 
on which RNA and other organic molecules have become 
attached (see Figure 25.4c). Finally, experiments have shown 
that some vesicles have a selectively permeable bilayer and 
can perform metabolic reactions using an external source of 
reagents—another important prerequisite for life.
to reanalyze molecules that Miller had saved from one of his 
experiments. They found that numerous amino acids had 
formed under conditions that simulated a volcanic eruption.
Another hypothesis is that organic compounds were first pro-
duced in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, areas on the seafloor 
where heated water and minerals gush from Earth’s interior 
into the ocean. Some of these vents, known as “black smokers,” 
release water so hot (300–400°C) that organic compounds 
formed there may have been unstable. But other deep-sea vents, 
called alkaline vents, release water that has a high pH (9–11) 
and is warm (40–90°C) rather than hot, an environment that 
may have been more suitable for the origin of life (Figure 25.3).
Studies related to the volcanic atmosphere and alkaline 
vent hypotheses show that the abiotic synthesis of organic 
molecules is possible under various conditions. Another 
source of organic molecules may have been meteorites. For 
example, fragments of the Murchison meteorite, a 4.5-billion-
year-old rock that landed in Australia in 1969, contain more 
than 80 amino acids, some in large amounts. These amino 
acids cannot be contaminants from Earth because they 
consist of an equal mix of ! and " isomers (see Figure 4.7). 
Organisms make and use only " isomers, with a few rare 
exceptions. Studies have shown that the Murchison meteor-
ite also contained other key organic molecules, including lip-
ids, simple sugars, and nitrogenous bases such as uracil.
Abiotic Synthesis of Macromolecules
The presence of small organic molecules, such as amino 
acids and nitrogenous bases, is not sufficient for the emer-
gence of life as we know it. Every cell has many types of 
1 mm
b Figure 25.3 Did life originate in 
deep-sea alkaline vents? The first 
organic compounds may have arisen in 
warm alkaline vents similar to this one 
from the 40,000-year-old “Lost City” vent 
field in the mid-Atlantic Ocean. These 
vents contain hydrocarbons and are full 
of tiny pores (inset) lined with iron and 
other catalytic minerals. Early oceans 
were acidic, so a pH gradient would 
have formed between the interior of the 
vents and the surrounding ocean water. 
Energy for the synthesis of organic 
compounds could have been harnessed 
from this pH gradient.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   583 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 585 ===

584 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
know it may have been preceded by an “RNA world,” in which 
small RNA molecules were able to replicate and to store genetic 
information about the vesicles that carried them.
Recently, Dr. Jack Szostak and colleagues at Harvard 
University succeeded in building a vesicle in which copying 
of a template strand of RNA could occur—a key step toward 
constructing a vesicle with self-replicating RNA. On early Earth, 
a vesicle with such self-replicating, catalytic RNA would differ 
from its many neighbors that lacked such molecules. If that ves-
icle could grow, split, and pass its RNA molecules to its “daugh-
ters,” the daughters would be protocells. Although the first such 
protocells likely carried only limited amounts of genetic infor-
mation, specifying only a few properties, their inherited char-
acteristics could have been acted on by natural selection. The 
most successful of the early protocells would have increased in 
number because they could exploit their resources effectively 
and pass their abilities on to subsequent generations.
Once RNA sequences that carried genetic information 
appeared in protocells, many additional changes would have 
been possible. For example, RNA could have provided the 
template on which DNA nucleotides were assembled. Double-
stranded DNA is a more chemically stable repository for genetic 
information than is the more fragile RNA. DNA also can be rep-
licated more accurately. Accurate replication was advantageous 
as genomes grew larger through gene duplication and other pro-
cesses and as more properties of the protocells became coded in 
genetic information. Once DNA appeared, the stage was set for a 
blossoming of new forms of life—a change we see documented 
in the fossil record.
(a)Self-assembly. The presence of montmorillonite clay greatly 
increases the rate of vesicle self-assembly.
(c)Absorption of RNA. This 
vesicle has incorporated 
montmorillonite clay particles 
coated with RNA (orange).
(b)Reproduction. Vesicles can 
divide on their own, as in this 
vesicle ”giving birth” to 
smaller vesicles (LM).
20 om
1 omVesicle
boundary
0.4
0.2
0
0 20 40 60
Time (minutes)
Precursor molecules plus
montmorillonite clay
Precursor 
molecules only
Relative turbidity,
an index of vesicle number
. Figure 25.4 Features of abiotically produced vesicles.
Self-Replicating RNA
The first genetic material was most likely RNA, not DNA. RNA 
plays a central role in protein synthesis, but it can also func-
tion as an enzyme-like catalyst (see Concept 17.3). Such RNA 
catalysts are called ribozymes. Some ribozymes can make 
complementary copies of short pieces of RNA, provided that 
they are supplied with nucleotide building blocks.
Natural selection on the molecular level has produced 
ribozymes capable of self-replication in the laboratory. How 
does this occur? Unlike double-stranded DNA, which takes 
the form of a uniform helix, single-stranded RNA molecules 
assume a variety of specific three-dimensional shapes mandated 
by their nucleotide sequences. In a given environment, RNA 
molecules with certain nucleotide sequences may have shapes 
that enable them to replicate faster and with fewer errors than 
other sequences. The RNA molecule with the greatest ability 
to replicate itself will leave the most descendant molecules. 
Occasionally, a copying error will result in a molecule with a 
shape that is even more adept at self-replication. Similar selec-
tion events may have occurred on early Earth. Thus, life as we 
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how molecules with both a 
hydrophobic region and a hydrophilic region can self-assemble into a 
bilayer when in water. (See Concept 5.3.)
  Mastering Biology  
Interview with Jack Szostak: Studying the 
origin of life
CONCEPT CHECK 25.1
1. What conditions on early Earth could have permitted the 
synthesis of organic molecules?
2. How would the appearance of protocells have represented 
a key step in the origin of life?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS In changing from an “RNA world” to 
today’s “DNA world,” genetic information must have flowed 
from RNA to DNA. After reviewing Figures 17.4 and 26.9, suggest 
how this could have occurred. Does such a flow occur today?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 25.2
The fossil record documents  
the history of life
Starting with the earliest traces of life, the fossil record opens 
a window into the world of long ago and provides glimpses of 
the evolution of life over billions of years. In this section, we’ll 
examine fossils as a form of scientific evidence: how fossils 
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   584 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 586 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 585
Plant fossil, about 300 
million years old
(a) Petrified tree in Arizona, 
about 215 million years old
(b) 150-million-year-old dinosaur 
tracks in Colorado
(c)
Insect in amber, about 
40 million years old
(d)
A 50,000-year-old wolf pup found in frozen soil in Yukon, Canada(e)
c Figure 25.5 A gallery of 
fossil types. (a) Sedimentary 
rock. Most fossils are found in 
sedimentary rocks, such as this 
plant fossil. (b) Mineralized 
organic matter. Some fossils, such 
as this petrified tree trunk, form 
as minerals seep into and replace 
organic matter. (c) Trace fossils. 
Footprints, burrows, or other traces 
of an organism’s activities can 
be preserved in the fossil record. 
(d) Amber. Entire organisms 
are sometimes found preserved 
in hardened resin from a tree. 
(e) Frozen soil, ice, and acid bogs. 
Rarely, frozen soil, ice, or an acid 
bog can preserve the body of larger 
organisms, such as this wolf pup.
form, how scientists date and interpret them, and what they 
can and cannot tell us about changes in the history of life.
The Fossil Record
Sedimentary rocks are the richest source of fossils. As a 
result, the fossil record is based primarily on the sequence 
in which fossils have accumulated in sedimentary rock lay-
ers, called strata (see Figure 21.3). Useful information is also 
provided by other types of fossils, such as insects preserved 
in amber (fossilized tree sap) and mammals frozen in soil 
(Figure 25.5).
The fossil record shows that there have been great changes 
in the kinds of organisms on Earth at different points in time. 
Many past organisms were unlike organisms living today, and 
many organisms that once were common are now extinct. As 
we’ll see later in this section, fossils also document how new 
groups of organisms arose from previously existing ones.
As substantial and significant as the fossil record is, keep in 
mind that it is an incomplete chronicle of evolution. Many of 
Earth’s organisms did not die in the right place and time to be 
preserved as fossils. Of the fossils that were formed, many were 
destroyed by later geologic processes, and only a fraction of 
the others have been discovered. As a result, the known fossil 
record is biased in favor of species that existed for a long time, 
were abundant and widespread in certain kinds of environ-
ments, and had hard shells, skeletons, or other parts that facili-
tated their fossilization. Even with its limitations, however, 
the fossil record is a remarkably detailed account of biological 
change over the vast scale of geologic time. Furthermore, as 
shown by recently unearthed fossils of whale ancestors with 
hind limbs (see Figure 21.19 and Figure 25.1), gaps in the fossil 
record continue to be filled by new discoveries.
How Rocks and Fossils Are Dated
Fossils provide valuable data for reconstructing the history 
of life, but only if we can determine where they fit in that 
story. While the order of fossils in rock strata tells us the 
sequence in which the fossils were laid down—their relative 
ages—it does not tell us their actual ages. Examining the rel-
ative positions of fossils is like peeling off layers of wallpaper 
in an old house. You can infer the sequence in which the 
layers were applied, but not the year each layer was added.
How can we determine the age of a fossil? One of the most 
common techniques is radiometric dating, which is based 
on the decay of radioactive isotopes (see Concept 2.2). In this 
process, a radioactive “parent” isotope decays to a “daughter” 
isotope at a characteristic rate. The rate of decay is expressed 
by the half-life, the time required for 50% of the parent 
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   585 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 587 ===

586 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
The Origin of New Groups of Organisms
Some fossils document the origin of new groups of organisms. 
Such fossils are central to our understanding of evolution; 
they illustrate how new features arise and how long it takes 
for such changes to occur. We’ll examine one such case here 
and in Figure 25.7: the origin of mammals.
Along with amphibians and reptiles, mammals belong 
to the group of animals called tetrapods (from the Greek 
tetra, four, and pod, foot), named for having four limbs. 
Mammals have a number of unique anatomical features 
that fossilize readily, allowing scientists to trace their ori-
gin. For example, the lower jaw is composed of one bone 
(the dentary) in mammals but several bones in other tetra-
pods. In addition, the lower and upper jaws in mammals 
hinge between a different set of bones than in other tetra-
pods. Mammals also have a unique set of three bones that 
transmit sound in the middle ear, the hammer, anvil, and 
stirrup, whereas other tetrapods have only one such bone, 
the stirrup (see Concept 34.6). Finally, the teeth of mam-
mals are differentiated into incisors (for tearing), canines 
(for piercing), and the multi-pointed premolars and molars 
isotope to decay (Figure 25.6). Each type of radioactive isotope 
has a characteristic half-life, which is not affected by tempera-
ture, pressure, or other environmental variables. For example, 
carbon-14 decays relatively quickly; its half-life is 5,730 years. 
Uranium-238 decays slowly; its half-life is 4.5 billion years.
Fossils contain isotopes of elements that accumulated in the 
organisms when they were alive. For example, a living organ-
ism contains the most common carbon isotope, carbon-12, 
as well as a radioactive isotope, carbon-14. When the organ-
ism dies, it stops accumulating carbon, and the amount of 
carbon-12 in its tissues does not change over time. However, 
the carbon-14 that it contains at the time of death slowly 
decays into another element, nitrogen-14. Thus, by measur-
ing the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in a fossil, we can 
determine the fossil’s age. This method works for fossils up to 
about 75,000 years old; fossils older than that contain too little 
carbon-14 to be detected with current techniques. Radioactive 
isotopes with longer half-lives are used to date older fossils.
Determining the age of these older fossils in sedimentary 
rocks can be challenging. Organisms do not use radioisotopes 
with long half-lives, such as uranium-238, to build their bones 
or shells. In addition, sedimentary rocks are often composed 
of sediments of differing ages. Although we cannot date these 
older fossils directly, an indirect method can be used to infer 
the age of fossils that are sandwiched between two layers of 
volcanic rock. As lava cools into volcanic rock, radioisotopes 
from the surrounding environment become trapped in the 
newly formed rock. Some of the trapped radioisotopes have 
long half-lives, allowing geologists to estimate the ages of 
ancient volcanic rocks. If two volcanic layers surrounding fos-
sils are found to be 525 million and 535 million years old, for 
example, then the fossils are roughly 530  million years old.
The study of fossils has helped geologists establish a geologic 
record: a standard time scale that divides Earth’s history into 
four eons and further subdivisions (Table 25.1). We’ll describe 
key events that occurred during these different time periods in 
Concept 25.3.
12
14
18 116
1 2
Time (half-lives)
Remaining
“parent”
isotope
Accumulating
“daughter”
isotope
3 4
Fraction of parent
isotope remaining
. Figure 25.6 Radiometric dating. In this diagram, each unit of 
time represents one half-life of a radioactive isotope.
DRAW IT Relabel the x-axis of this graph in years to illustrate the 
radioactive decay of uranium-238 (half-life = 4.5 billion years).
Cenozoic
Pleistocene
Pliocene
Oligocene
Eocene
Paleocene
33.9
23
56
145
201
299
359
485
419
444
541
635
1,000
66
252
Mesozoic
Paleozoic
  0.01
Neogene
Quaternary
Paleogene
Cretaceous
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Ediacaran
2,500
4,000
Miocene
Holocene 
 5.3
 2.6
Table 25.1
Age
(Millions of
Years Ago)Eon
Phan-
erozoic
Protero-
zoic
Neo-
protero-
zoic
Archaean
Hadean
Era Period Epoch
The Geologic Record
Approx. 4,600
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   586 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 588 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 587
Hinge
Temporal
fenestra
(partial view)
Hinge
New hinge
Original hinge
Synapsids
Therapsids
Cynodonts
OTHER
TETRAPODS
Reptiles
(including
dinosaurs and birds)
 †Dimetrodon
†Very late (non-
mammalian)
cynodonts
Mammals
DentaryArticular
Quadrate Squamosal
Key to skull bones
Temporal
fenestra
Hinge
Temporal
fenestra
Hinge
Canine tooth
Over the course of 120 million years, mammals originated 
gradually from a group of tetrapods called synapsids. Shown 
here are a few of the many fossil organisms whose morphological 
features represent intermediate steps between living mammals 
and their early synapsid ancestors. The evolutionary context of the 
origin of mammals is shown in the tree diagram at right (the dagger 
symbol † indicates extinct lineages).
Early synapsids had multiple bones in the lower jaw and single-pointed 
teeth. The jaw hinge was formed by the articular and quadrate bones. Early 
synapsids also had an opening called the temporal fenestra behind the eye 
socket. Powerful cheek muscles for closing the jaws probably passed through 
the temporal fenestra. Over time, this opening enlarged and moved in front of 
the hinge between the lower and upper jaws, thereby increasing the power and 
precision with which the jaws could be closed (much as moving a doorknob 
away from the hinge makes a door easier to close).
 
Later, a group of synapsids called therapsids appeared. Therapsids had large 
dentary bones, long faces, and the first examples of specialized teeth, large 
canines. These trends continued in a group of therapsids called cynodonts.
In early cynodont therapsids, the dentary was the largest bone in the lower 
jaw, the temporal fenestra was large and positioned forward of the jaw hinge, 
and teeth with several cusps first appeared (not visible in the diagram). As in 
earlier synapsids, the jaw had an articular-quadrate hinge.
Later cynodonts had teeth with complex cusp patterns, and their lower and 
upper jaws hinged in two locations: They retained the original articular-
quadrate hinge and formed a new, second hinge between the dentary and 
squamosal bones. (The temporal fenestra is not visible in this or the below 
cynodont skull at the angles shown.)
In some very late (nonmammalian) cynodonts and early mammals, the original 
articular-quadrate hinge was lost, leaving the dentary-squamosal hinge as the only 
hinge between the lower and upper jaws, as in living mammals. The articular and 
quadrate bones migrated into the ear region (not shown), where they functioned 
in transmitting sound. In the mammal lineage, these two bones later evolved 
into the familiar hammer (malleus) and anvil (incus) bones of the ear.
Synapsid (300 mya)
Therapsid (280 mya)
Early cynodont (260 mya)
Later cynodont (220 mya)
Very late cynodont (195 mya)
. Figure 25.7 Exploring the Origin of Mammals
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   587 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 589 ===

588 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Prokaryotes
Atmospheric
oxygen
344.5 3.5 2.6
Billions of years ago
HADEAN
ORIGIN OF
SOLAR SYSTEM
AND EARTH
ARCHAEAN
Geologic time is so vast that it can be difficult to visualize when key events
in the history of life on Earth occurred. In this time line, time runs from left
to right, from 4.6 billion years ago to the present. The fossils along the top
illustrate representative organisms from different points in time.
Oldest fossils of cells (prokaryotes) appear (3.5 bya) 
A section through
a fossilized
stromatolite
Some prokaryotes
bind thin ﬁlms of
sediments together,
producing layered
rocks called
stromatolites, such as
these in Shark Bay,
Australia.
Once life began, what types of
organisms lived on Earth for the next
2 billion years?
1.
2.
Concentration of atmospheric
oxygen begins to increase
(2.7 bya)
.ooM for C ﬁgure in this chCpter 
thCt uses hCtch OCrMs on one of 
its axes. Explain what the hatch 
OCrMs represent in thCt ﬁgure.
025100125
Millions of years ago
Hatch marks
TIME
The large time line in this ﬁgure 
shows all of geologic time to scale on 
an unbroken time line, but sometimes 
it is helpful to ’’break” a time line to 
limit a ﬁgure’s size and highlight key 
details. As shown at right, hatch 
marks are often used to represent 
such an interruption. 
. Figure 25.8 VISUALIZING THE SCALE OF GEOLOGIC TIME
Key events in life’s history include 
the origins of unicellular and 
multicellular organisms and the 
colonization of land
The first three eons in the geologic record—the Hadean, 
the Archaean, and the Proterozoic—together lasted about 
CONCEPT 25.3
CONCEPT CHECK 25.2
1. Describe an example from the fossil record that shows how 
life has changed over time.
2. WHAT IF? A fossilized skull you unearthed has a carbon-14/
carbon-12 ratio about 1Š16 that of the skulls of present-day ani-
mals. Approximately how many years old is the fossilized skull?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
(for crushing and grinding). In contrast, the teeth of other 
tetrapods usually consist of a row of undifferentiated, 
 s i n g l e - p o i n t e d  t e e t h .
As detailed in Figure 25.7, the fossil record shows that 
the unique features of mammalian jaws and teeth evolved 
gradually, in a series of steps. Keep in mind that the fig -
ure includes just a few examples of the fossil skulls that 
document the origin of mammals. If all the known fossils 
in the sequence were arranged by shape and placed side  
by side, their features would blend smoothly from one  
group to the next. Some of these fossils would reflect  
how the features of a group that dominates life today,  
the mammals, gradually arose in a previously existing 
group, the cynodonts. Others would reveal side branches 
on the tree of life—groups of organisms that thrived for 
millions of years but ultimately left no descendants that 
survive today.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   588 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 590 ===

PRESENT
ORIGIN OF
THE SOLAR SYSTEM
AND EARTH
60
45
30
15
Minutes
If we redraw the timeline as a circle, we 
can apply the visual analogy of a timer 
that begins with the origin of Earth and
counts down for 1 hour. In this way,
we can relate the relative timing and
duration of events that occurred
billions of years ago to a familiar time
scale. On a 1-hour time scale,
animals originated about 9 minutes
ago, while humans appeared less than
0.2 second ago.
Animals
Humans
Colonization
of land
Multicellular
eukaryotes
Single-celled
eukaryotes Atmospheric oxygen
Prokaryotes
Using the analogy of a 1-hour
countdown timer, when did
prokaryotes originate? When did
the colonization of land occur?
3.
Early eukaryote fossil with
a cell wall structure like
that of some living algae
Oldest fossils of
eukaryotic cells appear
(1.8 bya)
Steps in the origin of tetrapods 
(375 mya)
Tiktaalik, an extinct aquatic organism;
the closest known relative of the
tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that 
went on to colonize land
Origin of jawed vertebrates (440 mya) 
Coccosteus cuspidatus, a placoderm (ﬁshlike
vertebrate) that had a bony shield covering its
head and front end
Flowering plants
(angiosperms)
appear (140 mya)
Archaefructus sinensis, 
an early ﬂowering plant
Cambrian explosion (535–525 mya)
Sudden increase in diversity of many
animal phyla
Single-celled eukaryotes Multicellular eukaryotes Animals Colonization of land Humans
12 1.5 0.5
Ceno-
zoic
Billions of years ago
PROTEROZOIC
PHANEROZOIC
PRESENT
TIME
MesozoicPaleozoic
 Instructors: Additional questions 
related to this Visualizing Figure can 
be assigned in Mastering Biology.
these key events occurred against the vast backdrop 
of geologic time.
The First Single-Celled Organisms
Earth’s first organisms were 
 single-celled prokaryotes that lived 
in the ocean. The earliest direct 
 evidence of these organisms, dat-
ing from 3.5 billion years ago, 
comes from  fossilized stromatolites. 
Stromatolites are layered rocks that form when certain pro-
karyotes bind thin films of sediment together. Stromatolites 
and other early prokaryotes were Earth’s sole inhabitants for 
about 1.5 billion years. As we will see, these prokaryotes trans-
formed life on our planet.
Prokaryotes
Present
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
4 billion years. The Phanerozoic eon, roughly the last half 
billion years, encompasses most of the time that animals 
have existed on Earth. It is divided into three eras: the 
Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic. Each era represents a dis-
tinct age in the history of Earth and its life. For example, the 
Mesozoic era is sometimes called the “age of reptiles” because 
of its abundance of reptilian fossils, including those of dino-
saurs. The boundaries between the eras correspond to major 
extinction events, when many forms of life disappeared and 
were replaced by forms that evolved from the survivors.
As we’ve seen, the fossil record provides a sweeping 
 overview of the history of life over geologic time. 
Here we will focus on a few major events in that 
history, returning to study the details in Unit Five. 
Figure 25.8 will help you visualize how long ago 
 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 589
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   589 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 591 ===

590 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
The rise in atmospheric O2 levels left a huge imprint on the 
history of life. A few hundred million years later, another fun-
damental change occurred: the origin of the eukaryotic cell.
The First Eukaryotes
The oldest widely accepted fossils 
of eukaryotes are of single-celled 
organisms that lived 1.8 billion 
years ago. Recall that eukaryotic 
cells have more complex orga-
nization than prokaryotic cells: 
Eukaryotic cells have a nuclear enve-
lope, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and other inter-
nal structures that prokaryotes lack. Also, unlike prokaryotic 
cells, eukaryotic cells have a well-developed cytoskeleton, a 
feature that enables eukaryotic cells to change their shape 
and thereby surround and engulf other cells.
How did the eukaryotes evolve from their prokaryotic 
ancestors? Current evidence indicates that the eukaryotes 
originated by endosymbiosis when a prokaryotic cell 
engulfed a small cell that would evolve into an organelle 
found in all eukaryotes, the mitochondrion. The small, 
engulfed cell is an example of an endosymbiont, a cell that 
lives within another cell, called the host cell. The prokary-
otic ancestor of the mitochondrion probably entered the 
host cell as undigested prey or an internal parasite. Though 
such a process may seem unlikely, scientists have directly 
observed cases in which endosymbionts that began as prey 
or parasites developed a mutually beneficial relationship 
with a host in as little as five years.
By whatever means the relationship began, we can 
hypothesize how the symbiosis could have become benefi-
cial. For example, in a world that was becoming increasingly 
aerobic, a host that was itself an anaerobe would have bene-
fited from endosymbionts that could make use of the oxygen. 
Over time, the host and endosymbionts would have become 
a single organism, its parts inseparable. Although all eukary-
otes have mitochondria or remnants of these organelles, 
they do not all have plastids (a general term for chloroplasts 
and related organelles). Thus, the serial endosymbiosis 
hypothesis supposes that mitochondria evolved before plas-
tids through a sequence of endosymbiotic events. As shown 
in Figure 25.10, both mitochondria and plastids are thought 
to have descended from bacterial cells. The original host—the 
cell that engulfed the bacterium whose descendants gave rise 
to the mitochondrion—is thought to have been an archaean 
or a close relative of the archaea.
A great deal of evidence supports the endosymbiotic origin 
of mitochondria and plastids:
• The inner membranes of both organelles have enzymes 
and transport systems that are homologous to those 
found in the plasma membranes of living bacteria.
Photosynthesis and the Oxygen Revolution
Most atmospheric oxygen gas (O2) 
is of biological origin, produced 
during the water-splitting step of 
photosynthesis. When oxygenic 
photosynthesis first evolved—in 
photosynthetic prokaryotes similar 
to today’s cyanobacteria—the free O2 
it produced probably dissolved in the surrounding water until 
it reached a high enough concentration to react with elements 
dissolved in water, including iron. This would have caused the 
iron to precipitate as iron oxide, which accumulated as sedi-
ments. These sediments were compressed into banded iron 
formations, red layers of rock containing iron oxide that are a 
source of iron ore today. Once all of the dissolved iron had pre-
cipitated, additional O2 dissolved in the water until the seas 
and lakes became saturated with O2. After this occurred, the 
O2 finally began to “gas out” of the water and enter the atmo-
sphere. This change left its mark in the rusting of iron-rich ter-
restrial rocks, a process that began about 2.7 billion years ago.
As shown in Figure 25.9, the amount of atmospheric O2 
increased gradually from about 2.7 to 2.4 billion years ago, 
but then shot up relatively rapidly to between 1% and 10% of 
its present level. This “oxygen revolution” had an enormous 
impact on life. In some of its chemical forms, oxygen attacks 
chemical bonds and can inhibit enzymes and damage cells. 
As a result, the rising concentration of atmospheric O2 proba-
bly doomed many prokaryotic groups. Some species survived 
in habitats that remained anaerobic, where we find their 
descendants living today (see Concept 27.4). Among other 
survivors, diverse adaptations to the changing atmosphere 
evolved, including cellular respiration, which uses O2 in the 
process of harvesting the energy stored in organic molecules.
1,000
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
43210
Time (billions of years ago)
“Oxygen
revolution”
Atmospheric O2
(percent of present-day level; log scale)
. Figure 25.9 The rise of atmospheric oxygen. Chemical 
analyses of ancient rocks have enabled this reconstruction of 
atmospheric oxygen levels during Earth’s history.
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
Single-celled
eukaryotes
Present
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
Atmospheric
oxygen
Present
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   590 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 592 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 591
that, like the chromosomes of bacteria, are not associated 
with histones or large amounts of other proteins.
• As might be expected of organelles descended from free-
living organisms, mitochondria and plastids also have 
the cellular machinery (including ribosomes) needed to 
transcribe and translate their DNA into proteins.
• Finally, in terms of size, RNA sequences, and sensitivity to 
certain antibiotics, the ribosomes of mitochondria and 
plastids are more similar to bacterial ribosomes than they 
are to the cytoplasmic ribosomes of eukaryotic cells.
In Concept 28.1, we’ll return to the origin of eukaryotes, focus-
ing on what genomic data have revealed about the prokaryotic 
lineages that gave rise to the host and endosymbiont cells.
The Origin of Multicellularity
An orchestra can play a greater variety of musical composi-
tions than a violin soloist can; the increased complexity of the 
orchestra makes more variations possible. Likewise, the origin 
of structurally complex eukaryotic cells sparked the evolution 
of greater morphological diversity than was possible for the 
simpler prokaryotic cells. After the first eukaryotes appeared, a 
great range of unicellular forms evolved, giving rise to the diver-
sity of  single-celled eukaryotes that continue to flourish today. 
Another wave of diversification also occurred: Some single-
celled eukaryotes gave rise to multicellular forms, whose descen-
dants include a variety of algae, plants, fungi, and animals.
Early Multicellular Eukaryotes
Fossil evidence and DNA sequence 
data suggest that multicellular 
eukaryotes emerged about 1.3 bil-
lion years ago. The oldest known 
fossils of multicellular eukaryotes 
that can be resolved taxonomically 
are of relatively small red algae that 
lived 1.2 billion years ago. Larger and more diverse multicellular 
eukaryotes do not appear in the fossil record until about 600 
million years ago (Figure 25.11). These fossils, referred to as the 
• Mitochondria and plastids replicate by a splitting process 
that is similar to that of certain bacteria. In addition, 
each of these organelles contains circular DNA molecules 
Ancestral
prokaryote
Host cell
DNA
Plasma
membrane
Cytoplasm Infolding
of plasma 
membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nuclear
envelope
NucleusEngulfed
aerobic
bacterium
Mitochondrion
Engulfed
photosynthetic
bacterium
Ancestral
eukaryote 
(a heterotroph)
Ancestral photosynthetic
eukaryote
Plastid
Cell with nucleus
and endomembrane
system
. Figure 25.10 A hypothesis for the origin of mitochondria 
and plastids through serial endosymbiosis. The proposed 
host cell was an archaean or a close relative of the archaea. The 
proposed ancestors of mitochondria were aerobic, heterotrophic 
bacteria, while the proposed ancestors of plastids were 
photosynthetic bacteria. In this figure, the arrows represent change 
over evolutionary time.
 Mastering  Biology Figure Walkthrough
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
Multicellular
eukaryotes
Present
1 cm
0.5 cm
(a)
(b)
. Figure 25.11 Life becomes large. 
Fossils from the Ediacaran period document 
the oldest known macroscopic eukaryotes, 
such as (a) Doushantuophyton, an alga that 
lived 600 mya, and (b) Kimberella, a mollusc 
(or close relative) that lived 560 mya.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   591 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 593 ===

592 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
evidence of predation. Instead, these animals appear to have 
been grazers (feeding on algae), filter feeders, or scavengers, not 
hunters. The Cambrian explosion changed all of that. In a rela-
tively short period of time (10 million years), predators over 1 m 
in length emerged that had claws and other features for captur-
ing prey; simultaneously, new defensive adaptations, such as 
sharp spines and heavy body armor, appeared in their prey.
Although the Cambrian explosion had an enormous 
impact on life on Earth, it appears that many animal phyla 
originated long before that time. Recent DNA analyses sug-
gest that sponges had evolved by 700 million years ago; 
such analyses also indicate that the common ancestor of 
arthropods, chordates, and other animal phyla that radi-
ated during the Cambrian explosion lived 670 million years 
ago. Researchers have unearthed 710-million-year-old sedi-
ments containing steroids indicative of a particular group 
of sponges—a finding that supports the molecular data. 
In contrast, the oldest macroscopic fossils of animals date 
from 560 million years ago and include Kimberella, shown 
in Figure 25.11. Overall, fossils and DNA analyses suggest 
that animals originated about 700 million years ago and 
then remained small for over 100 million years—until they 
diversified explosively during the Cambrian and beyond.
The Colonization of Land
The colonization of land was another 
milestone in the history of life. There is 
fossil evidence that some prokaryotes 
lived on terrestrial surfaces as early as 
3.2 billion years ago. However, larger 
forms of life, such as fungi, plants, and 
animals, did not begin to colonize land 
until about 500 million years ago. This gradual evolutionary 
venture out of aquatic environments was associated with adapta-
tions that made it possible to reproduce on land and that helped 
prevent dehydration. For example, many plants today have a 
vascular system for transporting materials internally and a water-
proof coating of wax on their leaves that slows the loss of water to 
the air. Early signs of these adaptations were present 420 million 
years ago, at which time small plants (about 10 cm high) existed 
that had a vascular system but lacked true roots or leaves. By 40 
million years later, plants had diversified greatly and included 
trees and many other plants with true roots and leaves.
Plants appear to have colonized land in the company of 
fungi. Even today, the roots of most plants are associated with 
fungi that aid in the absorption of water and minerals from 
the soil (see Concept 31.1). These root fungi (or mycorrhizae), 
in turn, obtain their organic nutrients from the plants. Such 
mutually beneficial associations of plants and fungi are evident 
in some of the oldest fossilized plants, dating this relationship 
back to the early spread of life onto land (Figure 25.13).
Although many animal groups are now represented in ter-
restrial environments, the most widespread and diverse land 
Ediacaran biota, were of mostly soft-bodied  organisms—some 
over 1 m long—that lived from 635 to 541 million years ago 
(mya). The Ediacaran biota included both algae and animals, 
along with various organisms of unknown taxonomic affinity.
The rise of large eukaryotes in the Ediacaran period repre-
sents an enormous change in the history of life. Before that 
time, Earth was a microbial world: Its only inhabitants were 
single-celled prokaryotes and eukaryotes, along with an assort-
ment of microscopic, multicellular eukaryotes. As the diversifi-
cation of the Ediacaran biota came to a close about 541 million 
years ago, the stage was set for another, even more spectacular 
burst of evolutionary change: the “Cambrian explosion.”
The Cambrian Explosion
Many present-day animal phyla 
appear suddenly in fossils formed 
535–525 million years ago, early in 
the Cambrian period. This phenom-
enon is referred to as the Cambrian 
explosion. Fossils of several animal 
groups—sponges, cnidarians (sea 
anemones and their relatives), and molluscs (snails, clams, 
and their relatives)—appear in even older rocks dating from 
the late Proterozoic (Figure 25.12).
Prior to the Cambrian explosion, all large animals were soft-
bodied. The fossils of large pre-Cambrian animals reveal little 
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
Animals
Present
VISUAL SKILLS Circle the branch point that represents the most 
recent common ancestor of chordates and annelids. What is a minimum 
estimate of that ancestor’s age?
Time (millions of years ago)
PROTEROZOIC
Ediacaran Cambrian
PALEOZOIC
485515545575635695 605 0
Arthropods
Molluscs
Chordates
Echinoderms
Cnidarians
Sponges
Brachiopods
Annelids
. Figure 25.12 Appearance of selected animal groups. The 
white bars indicate the earliest fossil record of these animal groups.
Billions of
years ago
4
2 3
1
Colonization
of land
Present
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   592 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 594 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 593
animals are arthropods (particularly insects and spiders) and tetra-
pods. Arthropods were among the first animals to colonize land, 
roughly 450 million years ago. The earliest tetrapods found in the 
fossil record lived about 365 million years ago and appear to have 
evolved from a group of lobe-finned fishes (see Concept 34.3). 
Tetrapods include humans, although we are late arrivals on the 
scene. The human lineage diverged from other primates around 
6–7 million years ago, and our species originated only about 
195,000 years ago. If the clock of Earth’s history were rescaled to 
represent an hour, humans appeared less than 0.2 second ago.
. Figure 25.13 An ancient symbiosis. This 405-million-year-
old fossil stem (cross section) documents mycorrhizae in the early 
plant Aglaophyton major. The inset shows an enlarged view of a 
cell containing a branched fungal structure called an arbuscule; the 
fossil arbuscule resembles those 
seen in plant cells today.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Geerat  Vermeij: What fossils 
reveal about the  history of life
1. The first appearance of free oxygen in the atmosphere likely 
triggered a massive wave of extinctions among the prokary-
otes of the time. Why?
2. What evidence supports the hypothesis that mitochondria 
preceded plastids in the evolution of eukaryotic cells?
3. WHAT IF? What would a fossil record of life today look like?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 25.3
CONCEPT 25.4
The rise and fall of groups  
of organisms reflect differences 
in speciation and extinction rates
From its beginnings, life on Earth has been marked by the 
rise and fall of groups of organisms. Anaerobic prokaryotes 
originated, flourished, and then declined as the oxygen con-
tent of the atmosphere rose. Billions of years later, the first 
tetrapods emerged from the sea, giving rise to several major 
new groups of organisms. One of these, the amphibians, went 
Common
ancestor of
lineages A
and B 
012
Millions of years ago
345
†
†
†
†
†
†
Lineage ALineage B
. Figure 25.14 How speciation and extinction affect diversity. 
The species diversity of an evolutionary lineage will increase when 
more new member species originate than are lost to extinction. 
In this hypothetical phylogenetic tree, each horizontal branch 
represents one species. By 2 million years ago both lineage A and 
lineage B have given rise to four species, and no species have become 
extinct (denoted by a dagger symbol, †). By time 0, however, lineage 
A contains only one species, while lineage B contains eight species.
on to dominate life on land for 100 million years, until other 
tetrapods (including dinosaurs and, later, mammals) replaced 
them as the dominant terrestrial vertebrates.
The rise and fall of these and other major groups of organ-
isms have shaped the history of life. Narrowing our focus, we 
can also see that the rise or fall of any particular group is related 
to the speciation and extinction rates of its member species 
(Figure 25.14). Just as a population increases in size when there 
are more births than deaths, the rise of a group of organisms 
occurs when more new species are produced than are lost to 
extinction. The reverse occurs when a group is in decline. In 
the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can interpret data from the 
fossil record about changes in a group of snail species in the 
early Paleogene period. Such changes in the fates of groups of 
organisms have been influenced by large-scale processes such 
as plate tectonics, mass extinctions, and adaptive radiations.
VISUAL SKILLS Consider the period from 2 million years ago to time 0.  
For each lineage, determine how many speciation and extinction events 
occurred during that time.
Zone of arbuscule-
containing cells
Branched hyphae 
(arbuscule)
100 nm
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   593 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 595 ===

594 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
centimeters per year. 
They can also infer the 
past locations of the con-
tinents using the mag-
netic signal recorded in 
rocks at the time of their 
formation. This method 
works because as a con-
tinent shifts its position 
over time, the direction of 
magnetic north recorded 
in its newly formed rocks 
also changes.
Earth’s major tec-
tonic plates are shown 
in Figure 25.16. Many important geologic processes, including 
the formation of mountains and islands, occur at plate bound-
aries. In some cases, two plates are moving away from each 
other, as are the North American and Eurasian plates, which 
Plate Tectonics
If photographs of Earth were taken from space every 10,000 years 
and spliced together to make a movie, it would show something 
many of us find hard to imagine: The seemingly “rock solid” 
continents we live on move over time. Over the past billion 
years, there have been three occasions (1 billion, 600 million, 
and 250 million years ago) when most of the landmasses of 
Earth came together to form a supercontinent, then later broke 
apart. Each time, this breakup yielded a different configuration 
of continents. Based on the directions in which the continents 
are moving today, some geologists have estimated that a new 
supercontinent will form roughly 250 million years from now.
According to the theory of plate tectonics, the continents 
are part of great plates of Earth’s crust that essentially float 
on the hot, underlying portion of the mantle (Figure 25.15). 
Movements in the mantle cause the plates to move over time 
in a process called continental drift. Geologists can measure the 
rate at which the plates are moving now, usually only a few 
Do Ecological Factors Affect 
Evolutionary Rates? Researchers 
studied the fossil record to investigate 
whether differing modes of larval 
dispersal might explain species lon-
gevity within one taxon of marine 
snails, the family Volutidae. Some of 
the snail species had nonplanktonic 
larvae: They developed directly into 
adults without a swimming stage. Other species had planktonic 
larvae: They had a swimming stage and could disperse very long 
distances. The adults of these planktonic species tended to have 
broad geographic distributions, whereas nonplanktonic species 
tended to be more isolated.
How the Research Was Done T h e  r e s e a r c h e r s  s t u d i e d  t h e  s t r a t i-
graphic distribution of volutes in outcrops of sedimentary rocks lo-
cated along North America’s Gulf coast. These rocks, which formed 
from 66 to 37 million years ago, early in the Paleogene period, are 
an excellent source of well-preserved snail fossils. The researchers 
were able to classify each fossil species of volute snail as having 
planktonic or nonplanktonic larvae based on features of the earli-
est formed whorls of the snail’s shell. Each bar in the graph shows 
how long one species of snail persisted in the fossil record.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. You can estimate quantitative data (fairly precisely) from a 
graph. The first step is to obtain a conversion factor by mea-
suring along an axis that has a scale. In this case, 25 million 
years (my; from 60 to 35 million years ago [mya] on the x-axis) 
is represented by a distance of 7.0 cm. This yields a conversion 
factor (a ratio) of 25 my>7.0 cm=3.6 my>cm. To estimate 
the time period represented by a horizontal bar on this graph, 
measure the length of that bar in centimeters and multiply 
Estimating Quantitative Data from  
a Graph and Developing Hypotheses
2. Calculate the mean (average) persistence times for species with 
planktonic larvae and species with nonplanktonic larvae.
3. Count the number of new species that form in each group begin-
ning at 60 mya (the first three species in each group were present 
around 64 mya, the first time period sampled, so we don’t know 
when those species first appear in the fossil record).
4. Propose a hypothesis to explain the differences in longevity of 
snail species with planktonic and nonplanktonic larvae.
Data from T. A. Hansen, Larval dispersal and species longevity in Lower Tertiary 
gastropods, Science 199:885–887 (1978). Reprinted with permission from AAAS.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Millions of years ago (mya)
Species with
nonplanktonic
larvae
Species with
planktonic larvae
Paleocene Eocene
35404550556065
Crust
Mantle
Outer
core
Inner
core
. Figure 25.15 Cutaway view  
of Earth. The thickness of the 
crust is exaggerated here.
that measurement by the conversion factor, 3.6 my>cm. For 
example, a bar that measures 1.1 cm on the graph represents a 
persistence time of 1.1 cm*3.6 my>cm=4 million years.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   594 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 596 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 595
Antarctic
Plate
Cocos Plate
PaciƂc
Plate
Nazca
Plate
South
American
Plate
North
American
Plate
African
Plate
Arabian
Plate
Australian
Plate
Eurasian Plate
Philippine
Plate
Indian
Plate
Juan de Fuca
Plate
Scotia Plate
Caribbean
Plate
. Figure 25.16 Earth’s major tectonic plates. The blue arrows indicate direction of movement. 
The reddish orange dots represent zones of violent tectonic activity.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: Plate Tectonics 
are currently drifting apart at a rate of 
about 2 cm per year. In other cases, 
two plates are sliding past each other, 
forming regions where earthquakes are 
common. California’s infamous San 
Andreas Fault is part of a border where 
two plates slide past each other. In still 
other cases, two plates collide, pro-
ducing violent upheavals and form-
ing new mountains along the plate 
boundaries. One spectacular example 
of this occurred 45 million years ago, 
when the Indian plate crashed into the 
Eurasian plate, starting the formation 
of the Himalayan mountains.
Consequences of  
Continental Drift
Plate movements rearrange geog-
raphy slowly, but their cumulative 
effects are dramatic. In addition to reshaping the physical fea-
tures of our planet, continental drift also has a major impact 
on life on Earth.
One reason for this is that continental drift alters the habi-
tats in which organisms live. Consider the changes shown in 
Figure 25.17. About 250 million years ago, plate movements 
brought previously separated landmasses together into a super-
continent named Pangaea. Ocean basins became deeper, 
which drained shallow coastal seas. At that time, as now, most 
marine species inhabited shallow waters, and the formation of 
Pangaea destroyed much of that habitat. Pangaea’s interior was 
cold and dry, probably an even more severe environment than 
that of central Asia today. Overall, the formation of Pangaea 
greatly altered the physical environment and climate, which 
drove some species to extinction and provided new opportuni-
ties for groups of organisms that survived the crisis.
Organisms are also affected by the climate change that 
results when a continent shifts its location. The southern tip 
of Labrador, Canada, for example, once was located in the 
tropics but has moved 40° to the north over the last 200 mil-
lion years. When faced with the changes in climate that such 
shifts in position entail, organisms adapt, move to a new loca-
tion, or become extinct (this last outcome occurred for many 
organisms stranded on Antarctica, which separated from 
Australia 40 million years ago).
Continental drift also promotes allopatric speciation on 
a grand scale. When supercontinents break apart, regions 
that once were connected become isolated. As the continents 
drifted apart over the last 200 million years, each became 
a separate evolutionary arena, with lineages of plants and 
animals that diverged from those on other continents. For 
example, marsupial mammals fill ecological roles in Australia 
analogous to those filled by eutherians (placental mammals) 
on other continents (see Figure 21.18). Fossil evidence shows 
VISUAL SKILLS Is the Australian plate’s current direction of movement (see 
Figure 25.16) similar to the direction it traveled over the past 66 million years?
CenozoicMesozoicPaleozoic
252
135
66
Present
Millions of years ago
Pangaea
Laurasia
Gondwana
North America
Eurasia
Africa
IndiaSouth
America
AntarcticaAustralia
Madagascar
By the end of the
Mesozoic, Laurasia
and Gondwana
had separated into the
present-day continents.
By the mid-Mesozoic,
Pangaea had split into
northern (Laurasia)
and southern
(Gondwana)
landmasses.
At the end of the
Paleozoic, all of
Earth’s landmasses
were joined in the
supercontinent
Pangaea.
Earth’s youngest major 
mountain range, the 
Himalayas, began to 
form when India col-
lided with Eurasia 
about 45 million years 
ago. The continents 
continue to drift today.
. Figure 25.17 The history of continental drift during the 
Phanerozoic eon.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   595 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 597 ===

596 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
27 known orders of insects were wiped out. This mass extinc-
tion occurred in less than 500,000 years, possibly in just a few 
thousand years—an instant in the context of geologic time.
The Permian mass extinction occurred during the most 
extreme episode of volcanism in the past 500 million years. 
Geologic data indicate that 1.6 million km2 (roughly half 
the size of Western Europe) in Siberia was covered with lava 
hundreds of meters thick. The eruptions are thought to have 
produced enough carbon dioxide to warm the global climate 
by an estimated 6°C, harming many temperature-sensitive 
species. The rise in atmospheric CO2 levels would also have 
led to ocean acidification, thereby reducing the availability of 
calcium carbonate, which is required by reef-building corals 
and many shell-building species (see Figure 3.12). The erup-
tions would also have added nutrients such as phosphorus to 
marine ecosystems, stimulating the growth of microorgan-
isms. Upon their deaths, these microorganisms would have 
provided food for bacterial decomposers. Bacteria use oxygen 
as they decompose the bodies of dead organisms, thus caus-
ing oxygen concentrations to drop. This would have harmed 
oxygen-breathers and promoted the growth of anaerobic bac-
teria that emit a poisonous metabolic by-product, hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S) gas. Overall, the volcanic eruptions may have 
triggered a series of catastrophic events that together resulted 
in the Permian mass extinction.
that marsupial mammals originated in what is now Asia and 
reached Australia via South America and Antarctica while the 
continents were still joined. The subsequent breakup of the 
southern continents set Australia “afloat,” like a giant raft 
of marsupials. In Australia, marsupials diversified, and the 
few eutherians (placental mammals) that lived there became 
extinct; on other continents, most marsupials became extinct 
and the eutherians diversified.
Finally, continental drift can help explain puzzling geo-
graphic distributions of extinct organisms, such as fossils 
of the same species of Permian freshwater reptiles found in 
both Brazil and the West African nation of Ghana. These two 
parts of the world, now separated by 3,000 km of ocean, were 
joined together when these reptiles were living.
 Mastering Biology H H M I  V i d e o :  A n i m a t e d  L i f e :   
Pangea, Wegener, and Continental Drift
Mass Extinctions
The fossil record shows that the overwhelming majority of 
species that ever lived are now extinct. A species may become 
extinct for many reasons. Its habitat may have been destroyed, 
or its environment may have changed in a manner unfavorable 
to the species. For example, if ocean temperatures fall by even 
a few degrees, species that are otherwise well adapted may per-
ish. Even if physical factors in the environ-
ment remain stable, biological factors may 
change—the origin of one species can spell 
doom for another.
Although extinction occurs regularly, at 
certain times disruptive changes to the global 
environment have caused the rate of extinc-
tion to increase dramatically. The result is a 
mass extinction, in which large numbers 
of species become extinct worldwide.
The “Big Five” Mass Extinction Events
Five mass extinctions are documented in the 
fossil record over the past 500 million years 
(Figure 25.18). These events are particularly 
well documented for the decimation of hard-
bodied animals that lived in shallow seas, the 
organisms for which the fossil record is most 
complete. In each mass extinction, 50% or 
more of marine species became extinct.
Two mass extinctions—the Permian 
and the Cretaceous—have received 
the most attention. The Permian mass 
extinction, which defines the boundary 
between the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras 
(252 million years ago), claimed about 
96% of marine animal species and drasti-
cally altered life in the ocean. Terrestrial 
life was also affected. For example, 8 out of 
INTERPRET THE DATA As mentioned in the text, 96% of marine animal species became extinct 
in the Permian mass extinction (252 million years ago). Explain why the blue curve shows only a 50% 
drop at that time.
0
Q
66145201 252 299359 419 444
Time (millions of years ago)
485
Total extinction rate 
(families per million years):    
Number of extant families:    
541
0 0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1,100
5
10
15
20
25
CPeriod
Era
OS D
Paleozoic Mesozoic Cenozoic
CP Tr JC PN
. Figure 25.18 Mass extinction and the diversity of life. The five generally recognized 
mass extinction events, indicated by red arrows, represent peaks in the extinction rate of marine 
animal families (red line and left vertical axis). These mass extinctions interrupted the overall increase, 
over time, in the number of extant families of marine animals (blue line and right vertical axis).
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   596 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 598 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 597
Yucatán
Peninsula
Chicxulub
crater
NORTH
AMERICA
. Figure 25.19 A trauma for Cretaceous life. Beneath the 
Caribbean Sea, the 66-million-year-old Chicxulub crater measures 180 km  
across. The horseshoe shape of the crater and the pattern of debris 
in sedimentary rocks indicate that an asteroid struck at a low angle. 
This drawing represents the impact and its immediate effect: a cloud 
of hot vapor and debris that could 
have killed many of the plants and 
animals in North America within 
hours and ignited massive wildfires.
The Cretaceous mass extinction occurred 66 million years 
ago. This event extinguished more than half of all marine spe-
cies and eliminated many families of terrestrial plants and ani-
mals, including all dinosaurs (except birds, which are members 
of the same group; see Figure 34.25). One clue to a possible cause 
of the Cretaceous mass extinction is a thin layer of clay enriched 
in iridium that dates to the time of the mass extinction. Iridium 
is an element that is very rare on Earth but common in many of 
the meteorites and other extraterrestrial objects that occasion-
ally fall to Earth. As a result, researchers proposed that this clay is 
fallout from a huge cloud of debris that billowed into the atmo-
sphere when an asteroid collided with Earth. This cloud would 
have blocked sunlight and caused a sudden drop in global tem-
peratures lasting for several months to years.
Is there evidence of such an asteroid? Research has focused 
on the Chicxulub crater, a 66-million-year-old scar beneath 
sediments off the coast of Mexico (Figure 25.19). The cra-
ter is the right size to have been caused by an object with a 
diameter of 10 km. When the impact occurred, many species 
may have been particularly vulnerable to extinction because 
recent large-scale volcanic eruptions had already caused 
their populations to decline. Moreover, a 2018 study esti-
mated that wildfires resulting from the impact contributed 
to a sharp rise in atmospheric CO2 levels, causing a period of 
global warming that lasted 100,000 years—yet another stress 
for populations already in decline. Critical evaluation of these 
and other hypotheses for mass extinctions continues.
Is a Sixth Mass Extinction Under Way?
As you will read further in Concept 56.1, human actions, 
such as habitat destruction, are modifying the global environ-
ment to such an extent that many species are threatened with 
extinction. More than 1,000 species have become extinct 
in the last 400 years. Scientists estimate that this rate is 100 
to 1,000 times the typical background rate seen in the fossil 
record. Is a sixth mass extinction now in progress?
This question is difficult to answer, in part because it is 
hard to document the total number of extinctions occurring 
today. Tropical rain forests, for example, harbor many undis-
covered species. As a result, destroying tropical forest may 
drive species to extinction before we even learn of them.
Such uncertainties make it hard to assess the full extent of 
the current extinction crisis. Even so, it is clear that losses to date 
have not reached those of the “big five” mass extinctions, in 
which large percentages of Earth’s species became extinct. This 
does not in any way discount the seriousness of today’s situation. 
Monitoring programs show that many species are declining at an 
alarming rate due to habitat loss, introduced species, overharvest-
ing, and other factors. Recent studies on a variety of organisms, 
including lizards, pine trees, and polar bears, suggest that climate 
change may hasten some of these declines. The fossil record 
also highlights the potential importance of climate change: 
Over the last 500 million years, extinction rates have tended to 
increase when global temperatures were high (Figure 25.20). 
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 4
Relative temperature
Mass extinctions
Cooler Warmer
Relative extinction rate of marine animal genera
. Figure 25.20 Fossil extinctions and temperature. Extinction 
rates increased when global temperatures were high. Temperatures 
were estimated using ratios of oxygen isotopes and converted to an 
index in which 0 is the overall average temperature.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Day  
the Mesozoic Died 
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   597 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 599 ===

598 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
provided access to a new and abundant source of food, this 
newly formed group was wiped out during the mass extinction 
at the end of the Triassic (about 200 million years ago). Another 
120 million years passed before another group of gastropods 
(the oyster drills) exhibited the ability to drill through shells. As 
their predecessors might have done if they had not originated 
at an unfortunate time, oyster drills have since diversified into 
many new species. Finally, by eliminating so many species, mass 
extinctions can pave the way for adaptive radiations, in which 
new groups of organisms proliferate.
Adaptive Radiations
The fossil record shows that the diversity of life has increased 
over the past 250 million years (see blue line in Figure 25.18). 
This increase has been fueled by adaptive radiations, peri-
ods of evolutionary change in which groups of organisms form 
many new species whose adaptations allow them to fill different 
ecological roles, or niches, in their communities. Large-scale 
adaptive radiations occurred after each of the big five mass 
extinctions, when survivors became adapted to the many vacant 
ecological niches. Adaptive radiations have also occurred in 
groups of organisms that possessed major evolutionary innova-
tions, such as seeds or armored body coverings, or that colonized 
regions in which they faced little competition from other species.
Worldwide Adaptive Radiations
Fossil evidence indicates that mammals underwent a dramatic 
adaptive radiation after the extinction of terrestrial dinosaurs 
66 million years ago (Figure 25.22). Although mammals origi-
nated about 180 million years ago, the mammal fossils older than 
66 million years are mostly small and show less morphological 
diversity than found today. Many species appear to have been 
nocturnal based on their large eye sockets, similar to those in 
living nocturnal mammals. A few early 
mammals were intermediate in size, such 
as Repenomamus giganticus, a 1-m-long 
predator that lived 130 million years ago—
but none approached the size of many 
dinosaurs. Early mammals may have been 
restricted in size and diversity because they 
were eaten or outcompeted by the larger 
and more diverse dinosaurs. With the 
disappearance of the dinosaurs (except for 
birds), mammals expanded greatly in both 
diversity and size, filling the ecological 
roles once occupied by terrestrial dinosaurs.
The history of life has also been greatly 
altered by radiations in which groups of 
organisms increased in diversity as they 
came to play entirely new ecological roles 
in their communities. As we’ll explore in 
later chapters, examples include the rise of 
photosynthetic prokaryotes, the evolution  
Overall, the evidence suggests that unless dramatic actions 
are taken, a sixth, human-caused mass extinction is likely to 
occur within the next few centuries.
Consequences of Mass Extinctions
Mass extinctions have significant and long-term effects. By 
eliminating large numbers of species, a mass extinction can 
reduce a thriving and complex ecological community to a 
pale shadow of its former self. And once an evolutionary lin-
eage disappears, it cannot reappear. The course of evolution is 
changed forever. Consider what would have happened if the 
early primates living 66 million years ago had died out in the 
Cretaceous mass extinction. Humans would not exist, and life 
on Earth would differ greatly from what it is today.
The fossil record shows that it typically takes 5–10 million 
years for the diversity of life to recover to previous levels after 
a mass extinction. In some cases, it has taken much longer 
than that: It took about 100 million years for the number of 
marine families to recover after the Permian mass extinction 
(see Figure 25.18). These data have sobering implications. If 
current trends continue and a sixth mass extinction occurs, it 
will take millions of years for life on Earth to recover.
Mass extinctions can also alter ecological communities by 
changing the types of organisms residing there. For example, 
after the Permian and Cretaceous mass extinctions, the percent-
age of marine organisms that were predators increased sub-
stantially (Figure 25.21). A rise in the number of predators can 
increase both the risks faced by prey and the competition among 
predators for food. In addition, mass extinctions can curtail lin-
eages with novel and advantageous features. For example, in the 
late Triassic period, a group of gastropods (snails and their rela-
tives) arose that could drill through the shells of bivalves (such 
as clams) and feed on the animals inside. Although shell drilling 
485
CO S D C P Tr JC
MesozoicPaleozoic Cenozoic
PN
541
Predator genera
(percentage of marine genera)
0
10
20
30
40
50
444 419 359
The percentage of marine
genera that were predators
remained close to 15% for
200 million years.
After the Permian mass extinction, the
percentage of predators rose sharply
and then stabilized near 22%
for 150 million years—until it was
disrupted again by the Cretaceous
mass extinction.
Time (millions of years ago)
299 252 201 145 66 0
Period
Era
Q
. Figure 25.21 Mass extinctions and ecology. The Permian and Cretaceous mass 
extinctions (indicated by red arrows) altered the ecology of the oceans by increasing the 
percentage of marine genera that were predators.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   598 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 600 ===

Dubautia laxa
Argyroxiphium sandwicense
Close North American relative,
the tarweed Carlquistia muirii
Dubautia linearis
Dubautia scabra
Dubautia waialealae
KAUAI
5.1
million
years
3.7
million
years
0.4
million
years
OAHU
MOLOKAI
MAUI
HAWAII
1.3 
million 
years
LANAI
N
. Figure 25.23 Adaptive radiation on the Hawaiian Islands. Molecular analysis indicates that these 
remarkably varied Hawaiian plants, known collectively as the “silversword alliance,” are all descended from an 
ancestral tarweed that arrived on the islands from North America about 5 million years ago. Silverswords have 
since spread into different habitats and formed new species with strikingly different adaptations.
adaptations, such as stems that support 
plants against gravity and a waxy coat that 
protects leaves from water loss. Finally, 
organisms that arise in an adaptive radia-
tion can serve as a new source of food for 
still other organisms. In fact, the diver-
sification of plants stimulated a series of 
adaptive radiations in insects that ate or 
pollinated plants, one reason that insects 
are the most diverse group of animals on 
Earth today.
Regional Adaptive Radiations
Striking adaptive radiations have also 
occurred over more limited geographic 
areas. Such radiations can be initiated when a few organisms 
make their way to a new, often distant location in which 
they face relatively little competition from other organisms. 
The Hawaiian archipelago is one of the world’s great 
showcases of this type of adaptive radiation (Figure 25.23).  
of large predators in the Cambrian explosion, and the radia-
tions following the colonization of land by plants, insects, and 
tetrapods. Each of these last three radiations was associated with 
major evolutionary innovations that facilitated life on land. 
The radiation of plants, for example, was associated with key 
050100
Ancestral
mammal
Monotremes
(5 species)
Marsupials
(366 species)
Eutherians
(placental
mammals;
6,028 species)
ANCESTRAL
CYNODONT
150200250
Time (millions of years ago)
. Figure 25.22 Adaptive radiation of mammals.
 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 599
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Overview  
of Macroevolution
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   599 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 601 ===

600 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Changes in Rate and Timing
Many striking evolutionary transformations are the result of 
heterochrony (from the Greek hetero, different, and chronos, 
time), an evolutionary change in the rate or timing of devel-
opmental events. For example, an organism’s shape depends 
in part on the relative growth rates of different body parts dur-
ing development. Changes to these rates can alter the adult 
form substantially, as seen in the contrasting shapes of human 
and chimpanzee skulls (Figure 25.24). Other examples of the 
dramatic evolutionary effects of heterochrony include how 
increased growth rates of finger bones yielded the skeletal 
structure of wings in bats (see Figure 21.15) and how slowed 
growth of leg and pelvic bones led to the reduction and even-
tual loss of hind limbs in whales (see Figure 21.20).
Heterochrony can also alter the timing of reproductive 
development relative to the development of nonreproduc-
tive organs. If the development of reproductive organs 
accelerates compared to that of other organs, the sexually 
mature stage of a species may retain body features that were 
juvenile structures in an ancestral species, a condition called 
Located about 3,500 km from the nearest continent, the vol-
canic islands are progressively older as one follows the chain 
toward the northwest; the youngest island, Hawaii, is less 
than a million years old and still has active volcanoes. Each 
island was born “naked” and was gradually populated by stray 
organisms that rode the ocean currents and winds either from 
far-distant land areas or from older islands of the archipelago 
itself. The physical diversity of each island, including immense 
variation in soil conditions, elevation, and rainfall, provides 
many opportunities for evolutionary divergence by natural 
selection. Multiple invasions followed by speciation events 
have ignited an explosion of adaptive radiation in Hawaii. 
As a result, thousands of species that inhabit the islands are 
found nowhere else on Earth. Among plants, for example, 
about 1,100 species are unique to the Hawaiian Islands. 
Unfortunately, many of these species are now facing an ele-
vated risk of extinction due to human actions such as habitat 
destruction and the introduction of non-native plant species.
CONCEPT CHECK 25.4
1. Explain the consequences of plate tectonics for life on Earth.
2. What factors promote adaptive radiations?
3. WHAT IF? Based on evidence from previous mass extinctions, 
describe ecological and evolutionary consequences that could 
result if a sixth human-caused mass extinction occurs.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 25.5
Major changes in body form 
can result from changes in the 
sequences and regulation  
of developmental genes
The fossil record tells us what the great changes in the history 
of life have been and when they occurred. Moreover, an under-
standing of plate tectonics, mass extinction, and adaptive 
radiation provides a picture of how those changes came about. 
But we can also seek to understand the intrinsic biological 
mechanisms that underlie changes seen in the fossil record. For 
this, we turn to genetic mechanisms of change, paying particu-
lar attention to genes that influence development.
Effects of Developmental Genes
As you read in Concept 20.6, “evo-devo”—research at the 
interface between evolutionary biology and developmental 
 b i o l o g y — i s  i l l u m i n a t i n g  h o w  s l i g h t  g e n e t i c  d i f f e r e n c e s  c a n  p r o-
duce major morphological differences between species. In par-
ticular, large morphological differences can result from genes 
that alter the rate, timing, and spatial pattern of change in an 
organism’s form as it develops from a zygote into an adult.
Chimpanzee fetus
Chimpanzee infant Chimpanzee adult
Human fetus Human adult
Chimpanzee adult
. Figure 25.24 Relative skull growth rates. In the human 
evolutionary lineage, mutations slowed the growth of the jaw relative 
to other parts of the skull. As a result, in humans the skull of an adult is 
more similar to the skull of an infant than is the case for chimpanzees.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   600 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 602 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 601
The Evolution of Development
The 560-million-year-old fossils of Ediacaran animals (see 
Figure 25.11) suggest that a set of genes sufficient to produce 
complex animals existed at least 25 million years before the 
Cambrian explosion. If such genes have existed for so long, 
how can we explain the astonishing increases in diversity 
seen during and since the Cambrian explosion?
Adaptive evolution by natural selection provides one 
answer to this question. As we’ve seen throughout this unit, 
by sorting among differences in the sequences of protein-
encoding genes, selection can improve adaptations rapidly. 
In addition, new genes (created by gene duplication events) 
can take on new metabolic and structural functions, as can 
existing genes that are regulated in new ways.
Examples in the previous section suggest that developmental 
genes may have been particularly important. Thus, we’ll turn 
next to how new morphological forms can arise from changes in 
the nucleotide sequences or regulation of developmental genes.
Changes in Gene Sequence
New developmental genes arising after gene duplication events 
probably facilitated the origin of novel morphological forms. 
But since other genetic changes also may have occurred at 
such times, it can be difficult to establish causal links between 
genetic and morphological changes that occurred in the past.
This difficulty was sidestepped in a study of developmen-
tal changes associated with the divergence of six-legged 
insects from crustacean ancestors that had more than six 
legs. (As discussed in Concept 33.4, insects arose from within 
a subgroup of the crustaceans, the traditional name for 
organisms such as shrimp, crabs, and lobsters.) Crustaceans 
and insects differ in the pattern of expression and the effects 
of the Hox gene Ubx: In particular, in insects, Ubx suppresses 
leg formation where it is expressed (Figure 25.26).
To examine the workings of this gene, researchers cloned 
the Ubx gene from an insect, the fruit fly Drosophila, and from 
paedomorphosis (from the Greek paedos, of a child, and 
morphosis, formation). For example, most salamander species 
have aquatic larvae that undergo metamorphosis in becom-
ing adults. But some species grow to adult size and become 
sexually mature while retaining gills and other larval features 
(Figure 25.25). Such an evolutionary alteration of develop-
mental timing can produce animals that appear very different 
from their ancestors, even though the overall genetic change 
may be small. Indeed, recent evidence indicates that a change 
at a single locus was probably sufficient to bring about paedo-
morphosis in the axolotl salamander, although other genes 
may have contributed as well.
Changes in Spatial Pattern
Substantial evolutionary changes can also result from altera-
tions in genes that control the spatial organization of body 
parts. For example, master regulatory genes called homeotic 
genes (see Concept 18.4) determine such basic features as 
where a pair of wings and legs will develop on a bird or how a 
plant’s flower parts are arranged.
The products of one class of homeotic 
genes, the Hox genes, provide positional 
information in an animal embryo. This 
information prompts cells to develop 
into structures appropriate for a particular 
location. Changes in Hox genes or in how 
they are expressed can have a profound 
impact on morphology. For example, 
among crustaceans, a change in the loca-
tion where two Hox genes (Ubx and Scr) are 
expressed correlates with the conversion 
of a swimming appendage to a feeding 
appendage. Similarly, when comparing 
plant species, changes to the expression 
of homeotic genes known as MADS-box 
genes can produce flowers that differ dra-
matically in form (see Concept 35.5).
Gills
m Figure 25.25 Paedomorphosis. The adults of some species 
retain features that were juvenile in ancestors. This salamander is an 
axolotl, an aquatic species becomes a sexually mature adult while 
retaining certain larval (tadpole) characteristics, including gills.
Crustacean ancestor:
Ubx expressed in the
body segments shaded 
green; does not 
suppress legs
Changes over time in 
the expression and 
effect of the Ubx gene
Genital
segments
Head
Genital
segments
Present-day insect:
Ubx expressed in the
body segments shaded 
pink; suppresses legs
Ubx Ubx
Hox gene 7 Hox gene 7
. Figure 25.26 Effects of the Hox gene Ubx on the insect body plan. In crustaceans, 
the Hox gene Ubx is expressed in the region shaded green, the body segments between the 
head and genital segments. In insects, Ubx is expressed in only a subset (shaded pink) of the 
homologous body segments, where it suppresses leg formation.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   601 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 603 ===

602 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
a crustacean, the brine shrimp Artemia. 
Next, they genetically engineered fruit fly 
embryos to express either the Drosophila 
Ubx gene or the Artemia Ubx gene 
throughout their bodies. The Drosophila 
gene suppressed 100% of the limbs in 
the embryos, as expected, whereas the 
Artemia gene suppressed only 15%.
The researchers then sought to uncover 
key steps involved in the evolutionary 
transition from an ancestral Ubx gene to 
an insect Ubx gene. Their approach was 
to identify mutations that would cause 
the Artemia Ubx gene to suppress leg for-
mation, thus making its gene act more 
like an insect Ubx gene. To do this, they 
constructed a series of “hybrid” Ubx genes, 
each of which contained known segments 
of the Drosophila Ubx gene and known seg-
ments of the Artemia Ubx gene. By inserting 
these hybrid genes into fruit fly embryos 
(one hybrid gene per embryo) and observ-
ing their effects on leg development, the 
researchers were able to pinpoint the exact 
amino acid changes responsible for the 
suppression of additional limbs in insects. 
In so doing, this study provided evidence 
that particular changes in the nucleotide 
sequence of a developmental gene contrib-
uted to a major evolutionary change: the 
origin of the six-legged insect body plan.
Changes in Gene Regulation
A change in the nucleotide sequence of a 
gene may affect its function wherever the 
gene is expressed, while changes in the reg-
ulation of gene expression can be limited 
to one cell type (see Concept 18.4). Thus, a 
change in the regulation of a developmen-
tal gene may have fewer harmful side effects 
than a change to the sequence of the gene. 
This reasoning has prompted researchers to 
suggest that changes in the form of organ-
isms may often be caused by mutations 
that affect the regulation of developmental 
genes—not their sequences.
This idea is supported by studies of a 
variety of species, including threespine 
stickleback fish. These fish live in the 
open ocean and in shallow, coastal 
waters. In western Canada, they also 
live in lakes formed when the coastline 
receded during the past 12,000 years. 
Experiment Marine populations of the 
threespine stickleback fish (Gasterosteus 
aculeatus) have a set of protective spines on 
their lower (ventral) surface; however, these 
spines have been lost or reduced in some 
lake populations of this fish. Researchers 
performed genetic crosses and found that 
most of the reduction in spine size resulted 
from the effects of a single developmental 
gene, Pitx1. The researchers then tested two 
hypotheses about how Pitx1 causes this mor-
phological change.
Hypothesis A: A change in the DNA sequence 
of Pitx1 had caused spine reduction in lake populations. To test this idea, the team used 
DNA sequencing to compare the coding sequence of the Pitx1 gene between marine 
and lake stickleback populations.
Hypothesis B: A change in the regulation of the expression of Pitx1 had caused spine 
reduction. To test this idea, the researchers monitored where in the developing embryo 
the Pitx1 gene was expressed. They conducted whole-body in situ hybridization experi-
ments (see Concept 19.2) using Pitx1 DNA as a probe to detect Pitx1 mRNA in the fish.
Results
Test of
Hypothesis A:
Test of
Hypothesis B:
Close-up
of mouthClose-up of ventral surface
Result:
No
Result:
Yes
Marine stickleback embryo Lake stickleback embryo
Are there differences in 
the coding sequence of 
the Pitx1 gene in marine 
and lake stickleback Ƃsh!
The 283 amino acids of the Pitx1 
protein are identical in marine and 
lake stickleback populations.
Are there any differences 
in the regulation of 
expression of Pitx1?
Red arrows (         ) indicate regions of 
Pitx1 gene expression in the photo-
graphs below. Pitx1 is expressed in 
the ventral spine and mouth regions 
of developing Oarine stickleback Ƃsh 
but only in the mouth region of 
developing lake stickleback Ƃsh 
Conclusion The loss or reduction of ventral spines in lake populations of threespine 
stickleback fish appears to have resulted primarily from a change in the regulation of 
Pitx1 gene expression, not from a change in the gene’s sequence.
Data from M. D. Shapiro et al., Genetic and developmental basis of evolutionary pelvic reduction in three-
spine sticklebacks, Nature 428:717–723 (2004).
WHAT IF? Describe the set of results that would have led researchers to the conclusion 
that a change in the coding sequence of the Pitx1 gene was more important than a change in 
regulation of gene expression.
What causes the loss of spines in lake stickleback fish?
. Figure 25.27 Inquiry
m
Ventral spines
Threespine stickleback 
(Gasterosteus aculeatus)
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   602 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 604 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 603
Moreover, to paraphrase the Nobel Prize–winning geneticist  
François Jacob, evolution is like tinkering—a process in which 
new forms arise by the modification of existing structures or 
existing developmental genes. Over time, such tinkering has 
led to the three key features of the natural world described on 
the opening page of Chapter 21: the striking ways in which 
organisms are suited for life in their environments, the many 
shared characteristics of life, and the rich diversity of life.
Evolutionary Novelties
François Jacob’s view of evolution harkens back to Darwin’s 
concept of descent with modification. As new species form, 
novel and complex structures can arise as gradual modifica-
tions of ancestral structures. In many cases, complex struc-
tures have evolved in increments from simpler versions that 
performed the same basic function. For example, consider the 
human eye, an intricate organ constructed from numerous 
parts that work together in forming an image and transmit-
ting it to the brain. How could the human eye have evolved 
in gradual increments? Some argue that if the eye needs all of 
its components to function, a partial eye could not have been 
of use to our ancestors.
The flaw in this argument, as Darwin himself noted, lies in 
the assumption that only complicated eyes are useful. In fact, 
many animals depend on eyes that are far less complex than 
our own. The simplest eyes that we know of are patches of 
light-sensitive photoreceptor cells. These simple eyes appear 
to have had a single evolutionary origin and are now found in 
a variety of animals, including small molluscs called limpets. 
Such eyes have no equipment for focusing images, but they 
do enable the animal to distinguish light from dark. Limpets 
cling more tightly to their rock when a shadow falls on them, 
a behavioral adaptation that reduces the risk of being eaten 
(Figure 25.28). Limpets have had a long evolutionary history, 
demonstrating that their “simple” eyes are quite adequate to 
support their survival and reproduction.
In the animal kingdom, complex eyes have evolved inde-
pendently from such basic structures many times. Some 
Marine stickleback fish have a pair of spines on their ventral 
(lower) surface, which deter some predators. These spines are 
often reduced or absent in stickleback fish living in lakes that 
lack predatory fishes and that are also low in calcium. Spines 
may have been lost in such lakes because they are not advan-
tageous in the absence of predators, and the limited calcium 
is needed for purposes other than constructing spines.
At the genetic level, the developmental gene Pitx1 was 
known to influence whether stickleback fish have ventral 
spines. Was the reduction of spines in some lake populations 
due to changes in the Pitx1 gene or to changes in how the gene 
is expressed (Figure 25.27)? The researchers’ results indicate 
that the regulation of gene expression has changed, not the 
DNA sequence. Moreover, lake stickleback fish do express the 
Pitx1 gene in tissues not related to the production of spines 
(for example, the mouth), illustrating how morphological 
change can be caused by altering the expression of a devel-
opmental gene in some parts of the body but not others. In a 
follow-up study, researchers showed that changes to the Pel 
enhancer, a noncoding DNA region that affects expression of 
the Pitx1 gene, resulted in the reduction of ventral spines in 
lake sticklebacks. Overall, results from studies on stickleback 
fish provide a clear and detailed example of how changes in 
gene regulation can alter the form of individual organisms 
and ultimately lead to evolutionary change in populations.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Making  
of the Fittest: Evolving Switches, Evolving  
Bodies (Stickleback) 
CONCEPT CHECK 25.5
1. Explain how new body forms can originate by heterochrony.
2. Why is it likely that Hox genes have played a major role in 
the evolution of novel morphological forms?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Given that changes in morphol-
ogy are often caused by changes in the regulation of gene 
expression, predict whether noncoding DNA is likely to be 
affected by natural selection. (Review Concept 18.3.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 25.6
Evolution is not goal oriented
What does our study of macroevolution tell us about how 
evolution works? One lesson is that throughout the history  
of life, the origin of new species has been affected by both  
the small-scale factors described in Concept 23.3 (such as 
natural selection operating in populations) and the large-
scale factors described in this chapter (such as continental 
drift promoting bursts of speciation throughout the globe). 
. Figure 25.28 Limpets (Patella vulgata), molluscs that can 
sense light and dark with a simple patch of photoreceptor cells.
  Mastering Biology Interview with Cassandra Extavour: 
Studying the evolution of genes that control 
development
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   603 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 605 ===

604 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
Structures that evolve in one context but become co-opted for 
another function are sometimes called exaptations to distin-
guish them from the adaptive origin of the original structure. 
Note that the concept of exaptation does not imply that a struc-
ture somehow evolves in anticipation of future use. Natural 
selection cannot predict the future; it can only improve a struc-
ture in the context of its current utility. Novel features, such as 
the new jaw hinge and ear bones of early mammals, can arise 
gradually via a series of intermediate stages, each of which has 
some function in the organism’s current context.
molluscs, such as squids and octopuses, have eyes as complex 
as those of humans and other vertebrates (Figure 25.29). 
Although complex mollusc eyes evolved independently of 
vertebrate eyes, both evolved from a simple cluster of photo-
receptor cells present in a common ancestor. In each case, the 
complex eye evolved through a series of steps that benefited 
the eyes’ owners at every stage. Evidence of their independent 
evolution can be found in their structure: Vertebrate eyes detect 
light at the back layer of the retina and conduct nerve impulses 
toward the front, while complex mollusc eyes do the reverse.
Throughout their evolutionary history, eyes retained their 
basic function of vision. But evolutionary novelties can also 
arise when structures that originally played one role gradually 
acquire a different one. For example, as cynodonts gave rise to 
early mammals, bones that formerly comprised the jaw hinge 
(the articular and quadrate; see Figure 25.7) were incorporated 
into the ear region of mammals, where they eventually took on 
a new function: the transmission of sound (see Concept 34.6). 
Pigmented cells
(photoreceptors)
Epithelium Cellular
mass
(lens)
Cornea
Optic 
nerve
Epithelium
Fluid-filled 
cavity
Pigmented
layer
(retina)
Pigmented
cells
Nerve fibersNerve fibers
Optic nerve
Cornea
Lens
Retina
Optic nerve
(a) Patch of pigmented cells (b) Eyecup
(c) Pinhole camera-type eye
(e) Complex camera lens-type eye
(d) Eye with primitive lens
The limpet Patella has a simple 
patch of photoreceptors.
The Nautilus eye functions like 
a pinhole camera (an early type 
of camera lacking a lens).
The marine snail Murex has a 
primitive lens consisting of a 
mass of crystal-like cells. The 
cornea is a transparent region 
of tissue that protects the eye 
and helps focus light. 
The squid Loligo has a complex eye with features (cornea, lens, and 
retina) similar to those of vertebrate eyes. However, the squid eye 
evolved independently from vertebrate eyes.
The slit shell mollusc 
Pleurotomaria has an eyecup.
. Figure 25.29 A range of eye complexity among molluscs.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Origin  
of Flight: What Use Is Half a Wing?      
Evolutionary Trends
What else can we learn from patterns of macroevolution? 
Consider evolutionary “trends” observed in the fossil record. 
For instance, some evolutionary lineages exhibit a trend toward 
larger or smaller body size. An example is the evolution of the 
present-day horse (genus Equus), a descendant of the 55-million-
year-old Hyracotherium (Figure 25.30). About the size of a large 
dog, Hyracotherium had four toes on its front feet, three toes on 
its hind feet, and teeth adapted for browsing on bushes and trees. 
In comparison, present-day horses are larger, have only one toe 
on each foot, and possess teeth modified for grazing on grasses.
Extracting a single evolutionary progression from the fossil 
record can be misleading, however; it is like describing a bush 
as growing toward a single point by tracing only the branches 
that lead to that twig. For example, by selecting certain spe-
cies from the available fossils, it is possible to arrange a succes-
sion of animals intermediate between Hyracotherium and liv-
ing horses that shows a trend toward large, single-toed species 
(follow the yellow highlighting in Figure 25.30). However, if 
we consider all fossil horses known today, this apparent trend 
vanishes. The genus Equus did not evolve in a straight line; 
it is the only surviving twig of an evolutionary tree that is so 
branched that it is more like a bush. Equus actually descended 
through a series of speciation episodes that included several 
adaptive radiations, not all of which led to large, one-toed, 
grazing horses. In fact, phylogenetic analyses suggest that all 
lineages that include grazers are closely related to Parahippus; 
the many other horse lineages, all of which are now extinct, 
remained multi-toed browsers for 35 million years.
Branching evolution can result in a real evolutionary trend 
even if some species counter the trend. One model of long-term 
trends views species as analogous to individuals: Speciation is 
their birth, extinction is their death, and new species that diverge 
from them are their offspring. In this model, just as popula-
tions of individual organisms undergo natural selection, species 
undergo species selection. The species that endure the longest and 
generate the most new offspring species determine the direction 
of major evolutionary trends. The species selection model sug-
gests that “differential speciation success” plays a role in macro-
evolution similar to the role of differential reproductive success 
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   604 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 606 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 605
environments is enormous: It is through them that the 
staggering diversity of life—Darwin’s “endless forms most 
beautiful”—has arisen.
in microevolution. Evolutionary trends can also result directly 
from natural selection. For example, when horse ancestors 
invaded the grasslands that spread during the mid-Cenozoic, 
there was strong selection for grazers that could escape predators 
by running faster. This trend would not have occurred without 
open grasslands.
Whatever its cause, an evolutionary trend does not 
imply that there is some intrinsic drive toward a particu-
lar phenotype. Evolution is the result of the interactions 
between organisms and their current environments; if 
environmental conditions change, an evolutionary trend 
may cease or even reverse itself. The cumulative effect of 
these ongoing interactions between organisms and their 
Equus
Anchitherium
Mesohippus
Hyracotherium
Hyracotherium
relatives
Pliohippus
Merychippus
Parahippus
Orohippus
Archaeohippus
Hypohippus
Hipparion
Neohipparion
Nannippus
Callippus
Hippidion and
close relatives
Miohippus
Epihippus
Megahippus
Sinohippus
Propalaeotherium
Pachynolophus
Haplohippus
Palaeotherium
Holocene
Pleistocene
Pliocene
Miocene
Millions of years ago
OligoceneEocene
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Grazers
Browsers
Key
m Figure 25.30 The evolution of horses. 
Using yellow to trace a sequence of fossil 
horses that are intermediate in form between 
the present-day horse (Equus) and its Eocene 
ancestor Hyracotherium creates the illusion of 
a progressive trend toward larger size, reduced 
number of toes, and teeth modified for grazing. 
In fact, Equus is the only surviving twig of an 
evolutionary bush with many divergent trends.
CONCEPT CHECK 25.6
1. How can the Darwinian concept of descent with modifica-
tion explain the evolution of such complex structures as the 
vertebrate eye?
2. WHAT IF? The myxoma virus kills up to 99.8% of infected 
European rabbits in populations with no previous exposure 
to the virus. The virus is transmitted between living rabbits 
by mosquitoes. Describe an evolutionary trend (in either the 
rabbit or virus) that might occur after a rabbit population 
first encounters the virus.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   605 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 607 ===

606 UNIT FOUR  Evolution
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
The rise and fall of groups of organisms reflect 
differences in speciation and extinction rates (pp. 593–600)
• In plate tectonics, continental plates move gradually over time, 
altering the physical geography and climate of Earth, leading to 
extinctions in some groups and speciation in others.
• Evolutionary history has been punctuated by five mass 
extinctions that radically altered life’s history. Possible causes 
for these extinctions include continental drift, volcanic activity, 
and impacts from asteroids.
• Large increases in the diversity of life have resulted from 
adaptive radiations that followed mass extinctions. Adaptive 
radiations have also occurred in groups of organisms that pos-
sessed major evolutionary innovations or that colonized new re-
gions in which there was little competition from other organisms.
? Explain how the broad evolutionary changes seen in the fossil record 
are the cumulative result of speciation and extinction events.
Conditions on early Earth made the origin of life 
possible (pp. 582–584)
• Experiments simulating possible early atmospheres have pro-
duced organic molecules from inorganic precursors. Amino  
acids, lipids, sugars, and nitrogenous bases have also been found 
in meteorites.
• Amino acids and RNA nucleotides polymerize when dripped onto 
hot sand, clay, or rock. Organic compounds can spontaneously 
assemble into protocells, membrane-bounded droplets that 
have some properties of cells.
• The first genetic material may have self-replicating, catalytic 
RNA. Early protocells containing such RNA would have increased 
through natural selection.
? Describe the roles that montmorillonite clay and vesicles may have 
played in the origin of life.
CONCEPT 25.1
CONCEPT 25.2
The fossil record documents the history  
of life (pp. 584–588)
• The fossil record, based largely on fossils found in sedimentary 
rocks, documents the rise and fall of different groups of organ-
isms over time.
• Sedimentary strata reveal the relative ages of fossils. The ages 
of fossils can be estimated by radiometric dating and other 
methods.
• The fossil record shows how new groups of organisms can arise 
via the gradual modification of preexisting organisms.
? What are the challenges of estimating the ages of old fossils? Explain 
how these challenges may be overcome in some circumstances.
CONCEPT 25.3
Key events in life’s history include the origins of 
unicellular and multicellular organisms and the 
colonization of land (pp. 588–593)
4,000
1.8 bya:
First eukaryotes 
(single-celled)
1.3 bya:
First 
multicellular
eukaryotes
3.5 billion years 
ago (bya):
First prokaryotes 
(single-celled)
Millions of years ago (mya)
500 mya:
Colonization
of land by
fungi, plants,
and animals
535–525 mya:
Cambrian explosion
(great increase in diversity
of animal forms)
3,500 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500
Present
? What is the “Cambrian explosion, ”  and why is it significant?
CONCEPT 25.4
CONCEPT 25.5
Major changes in body form can result from changes 
in the sequences and regulation of developmental 
genes (pp. 600–603)
• Developmental genes affect morphological differences between 
species by influencing the rate, timing, and spatial patterns of 
change in an organism’s form as it develops into an adult.
• The evolution of new forms can be caused by changes in the 
nucleotide sequences or regulation of developmental genes.
? How could changes in a single gene or DNA region ultimately lead to 
the origin of a new group of organisms?
CONCEPT 25.6
Evolution is not goal oriented (pp. 603–605)
• Novel and complex biological structures can evolve through a 
series of incremental modifications, each of which benefits the 
organism that possesses it.
• Evolutionary trends can be caused by natural selection in a 
changing environment or species selection, resulting from inter-
actions between organisms and their current environments.
? Explain the reasoning behind the statement “Evolution is not goal 
oriented.”
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
8. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Describe how gene flow, genetic 
drift, and natural selection all can influence macroevolution.
9. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Herbivory (plant eating) has evolved 
repeatedly in insects, typically from meat-eating or detritus-
feeding ancestors (detritus is dead organic matter). Moths and 
butterflies, for example, eat plants, whereas their “sister group” 
   Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
25 Chapter Review
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–7 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   606 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 608 ===

 CHAPTER 25  Macroevolution 607
In 2010, the Soufriere Hills volcano on the Caribbean island of 
Montserrat erupted violently, spewing huge clouds of ash and 
gases into the sky. Explain how the volcanic eruptions at the 
end of the Permian period and the formation of Pangaea, both 
of which occurred about 252 million years ago, set in motion 
events that altered evolutionary history.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
(the insect group to which they are most closely related), the 
caddisflies, feed on animals, fungi, or detritus. As illustrated in 
the following phylogenetic tree, the combined moth/butterfly 
and caddisfly group shares a common ancestor with flies and 
fleas. Like caddisflies, flies and fleas are thought to have evolved 
from ancestors that did not eat plants.
Flies and
fleas
Caddisflies
Moths and
butterfliesHerbivory
There are 140,000 species of moths and butterflies and 7 ,000 
species of caddisflies. State a hypothesis about the impact of 
herbivory on adaptive radiations in insects. How could this 
hypothesis be tested?
10. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Y ou have 
seen many examples of how form fits function at all levels 
of the biological hierarchy. However, we can imagine forms 
that would function better than some forms actually found 
in nature. For example, if the wings of a bird were not formed 
from its forelimbs, such a hypothetical bird could fly yet also 
hold objects with its forelimbs. In a short essay (100–150 
words), use the concept of “evolution as tinkering” to explain 
why there are limits to the functionality of forms in nature.
11. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How has adaptive evolution occurred in stickleback fish? 
Go to “What the Pelvis Can Teach Us about Evolution”  
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   607 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 609 ===

URRY1637_12_GE_C25_PRF.indd   608 3/14/20   2:58 AM

=== SIDE 610 ===

Sallie (Penny) Chisholm, Institute Professor 
in Civil and Environmental Engineering at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has 
received the 2011 National Medal of Science, the 
2019 Crafoord Prize in Biosciences, and many other 
prestigious awards. Dr. Chisholm received a B.A. in 
Biology and Chemistry from Skidmore College and 
a Ph.D. in Biology from the State University of New 
York, Albany. Elected to the U.S. National Academy 
of Sciences in 2003, Dr. Chisholm has a long-
standing interest in the essential roles that pho-
tosynthetic microbes play in marine ecosystems. 
Currently, she and her students are studying these 
organisms from the genome to global scale.
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFEUnit 5 
How did you first become interested 
in science?
I grew up in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula, 
in the sticks. Growing up, my family was all 
about business; I wasn’t from an academic 
background. So, when I started studying 
biology in college, I was kind of surprised 
to find out that I liked science as a way 
of knowing. I had never been exposed to 
doing experiments and discovering new 
things on your own. I had the chance to 
do an independent research project on a 
local lake to measure its manganese bud-
get. We measured the movement of man-
ganese into and out of the lake over the 
course of a year, drilling holes in the ice to 
sample in winter. All of this was really cool 
and got me excited about the dynamics of 
aquatic ecosystems. Once I looked under 
the microscope and saw a world that I 
didn’t even know existed—the microbes 
living in lakes—there was no turning back.
Much of your research is on the 
bacterium Prochlorococcus. Tell us 
about this organism.
Prochlorococcus is the smallest photo-
synthetic cell on the planet and the most 
abundant—it is less than 1/100th the 
width of a human hair, and there are over 
a billion billion billion of these tiny cells 
in the ocean! Prochlorococcus feeds small 
protists, which in turn are eaten by larger 
marine organisms, and thus they play a 
key role in ocean ecosystems. And when 
Prochlorococcus cells are infected by viruses, 
they break apart and their organic com-
pounds serve as a food source for other 
bacteria in the ocean. Despite these organ-
isms’ importance, we didn’t even know they 
existed when I was a student. And then, in 
the mid-1980s, I was fortunate enough to 
be involved in their discovery. I was fasci-
nated by them—they were almost every-
where in the oceans. Eventually we learned 
to grow them in the lab. I was hooked!
What has Prochlorococcus taught you?
We’ve known for a long time about 
 d i a t o m s  a n d  o t h e r  r e l a t i v e l y  l a r g e  p h o t o-
synthetic organisms—phytoplankton—in 
the ocean. Those organisms were like the 
trees and the bushes. Suddenly, with the 
discovery of small photosynthetic bacte-
ria such as Prochlorococcus, we learned, 
“Oh! There’s grass, too!” Once we knew 
Prochlorococcus was there, we developed 
methods to monitor it in the field and sort 
out individual cells. We wondered how a 
single species could be so abundant in so 
many different areas of 
the ocean. We found 
out that this organism 
has extremely high lev-
els of genetic diversity. 
This enables it to thrive 
in many different 
ocean environments, 
despite ever-changing 
conditions. Overall, 
studying Prochlorococcus has taught me to 
be humbled by the mind-blowing complex-
ity of the natural world.
To date, what is the most surprising 
discovery from your lab?
The discovery of “grass” in the ocean was 
certainly a surprise! More recently, we’ve 
learned that the ocean is full of vesicles, 
very small lipid-bound particles that are 
budded off a cell. They look like little round 
peas on top of the cell. For years I had a 
picture of them that one of my students 
had taken, and I would ask people, “What 
do you think this is?” No one knew, until 
one of my post-docs speculated that they 
were vesicles, and demonstrated this to be 
true. He discovered that they contain DNA, 
as well as RNA and a variety of proteins 
and lipids. We can determine which spe-
cies produced a vesicle by sequencing the 
DNA it contains. We found out that many 
different species are producing vesicles. 
This is a beautiful example of how a casual 
observation in the lab—a photograph that 
I kept in a file cabinet for years— eventually 
led to the discovery of a new component 
of ocean ecosystems. Now the challenge is 
figuring out what they are doing!
What do you find most rewarding 
about your job?
Working with Prochlorococcus is such a 
gift! Over the years, it’s been an almost 
endless process of discovery—the organ-
ism is such a fundamental part of life in 
the ocean, and there are so many differ-
ent questions you 
can ask. It has 
also been fruit-
ful and excit-
ing to work on 
Prochlorococcus 
with students 
and colleagues 
from many 
different back-
grounds. It is 
wonderful to see my students working 
together to answer really hard questions. 
And I’ve learned so much from them—it 
has been a privilege and a joy to help 
them discover what they’re best at and 
what they really enjoy doing. I love what 
I do. What could be more important than 
studying life?
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Penny Chisholm
“Studying Prochlorococcus  
has taught me to be 
humbled by the mind-
blowing complexity of the 
natural world.”
Cell
Vesicle
1 om
. Prochlorococcus cells and vesicles.
URRY1637_12_GE_U05_PRF.indd   609 3/21/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 611 ===

Figure 26.1 A human immune cell (blue) infected by human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) is releasing more HIV viruses (gold dots), which will go on to infect other 
cells. Left untreated, HIV destroys vital immune system cells, causing AIDS. This 
disease has killed about 35 million people worldwide.
Introduction  
to Viruses26
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 26
• HHMI Animation: HIV Replicative Cycle
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Viral Replication
• Activity: Phage Lysogenic and Lytic 
Cycles
• Tutorial: CRISPR: The Discovery of 
Bacterial Adaptive Immunity
Study Tip
Make flowcharts: Make a simple 
flowchart for each viral replicative cycle 
in this chapter. Below is the beginning of 
an example for the lysogenic cycle. Note 
the similarities and differences between 
the replicative cycles.
26.1 A virus consists of a nucleic acid 
surrounded by a protein coat p. 611
26.2 Viruses replicate only in host 
cells p. 613
26.3 Viruses and prions are 
formidable pathogens in animals 
and plants p. 620
KEY CONCEPTS
Lysogenic cycle
Virus attaches to bacterial cell
and injects genome.
Viral genome is integrated into
the bacterial chromosome.
How does a virus make more viruses?
replicated by 
host enzymes
transcribed by 
host enzymes
translated by 
host ribosomes
self-assembled 
with viral genome
A virus consists only of nucleic acid, proteins, and sometimes a 
membranous envelope. After infecting a host cell, it uses the host cell's 
molecules to make new viruses, as shown in this simplified diagram.  
Generic virus
Viral genome
(DNA or RNA)
Viral genome
Copies of
viral genome
Viral mRNA
Viral proteins
New
viruses
OR
Virus enters host cell
and releases
genome.
With some viruses, the host cell remains 
alive after the new viruses are released.
With some viruses, the host cell bursts 
when the new viruses are released.610
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   610 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 612 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  611
A virus consists of a nucleic acid 
surrounded by a protein coat
Compared with eukaryotic and even prokaryotic cells, most 
viruses are much smaller and simpler in structure. Lacking the 
structures and metabolic machinery found in a cell, a virus 
is an infectious particle consisting of little more than genes 
packaged in a protein coat.
Are viruses living or nonliving? Early on, they were consid-
ered biological chemicals; the Latin root for virus means “poi-
son.” Viruses can cause a wide variety of diseases, so researchers 
in the late 1800s saw a parallel with bacteria and proposed that 
viruses were the simplest of living forms. However, viruses can-
not reproduce or carry out metabolic activities outside of a host 
cell. Most biologists would probably agree that viruses are not 
alive, but instead exist in a shady area between life-forms and 
chemicals. The simple phrase used by two researchers describes 
them aptly: Viruses lead “a kind of borrowed life.”
The Discovery of Viruses: Scientific Inquiry
Scientists detected viruses indirectly long before they were able 
to see them. The story of how viruses were discovered begins 
in 1883. A German scientist named Adolf Mayer was studying 
tobacco mosaic disease, which stunts the growth of tobacco 
plants and gives their leaves a mottled, or mosaic, coloration. 
Mayer discovered that he could transmit the disease from plant 
to plant by rubbing sap extracted from diseased leaves onto 
healthy plants. After an unsuccessful search for an infectious 
microorganism in the sap, he suggested that the disease was 
caused by unusually small bacteria that were invisible under 
a microscope. This hypothesis was tested a decade later by 
Dmitri Ivanowsky, a Russian biologist who passed sap from 
infected tobacco leaves through a filter designed to remove 
bacteria. After filtration, the sap still produced mosaic disease.
But Ivanowsky reasoned that perhaps the bacteria were 
small enough to pass through the filter or made a toxin that 
could do so. The second possibility was ruled out when the 
Dutch botanist Martinus Beijerinck carried out a classic series 
of experiments that showed that the infectious agent in the 
filtered sap could replicate (Figure 26.2).
In fact, the pathogen replicated only within the host it 
infected. In further experiments, Beijerinck showed that unlike 
bacteria used in the lab at that time, the mysterious agent of 
mosaic disease could not be cultivated on nutrient media in 
test tubes or petri dishes. Beijerinck imagined a replicating 
particle much smaller and simpler than a bacterium, and he 
is generally credited with being the first scientist to voice the 
concept of a virus. His suspicions were confirmed in 1935 
when the American scientist Wendell Stanley crystallized the 
infectious particle, now known as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). 
Subsequently, TMV and many other viruses were actually seen 
with the help of the electron microscope.
CONCEPT 26.1
Structure of Viruses
The tiniest viruses are only 20 nm in diameter—smaller 
than a ribosome. Millions could easily fit on a pinhead. 
Even the largest known virus, which has a diameter of 
1,500 nanometers (1.5 µm), is barely visible under the light 
microscope. Stanley’s discovery that some viruses could be 
crystallized was exciting and puzzling news. Not even the 
simplest of cells can aggregate into regular crystals. But if 
viruses are not cells, then what are they? Examining the 
structure of a virus more closely reveals that it is an infectious 
particle consisting of one or more molecules of a nucleic acid 
enclosed in a protein coat and, for some viruses, surrounded 
by a membranous envelope.
Experiment In the late 1800s, Martinus Beijerinck, of the 
Technical School in Delft, the Netherlands, investigated the 
properties of the agent that causes tobacco mosaic disease 
(then called spot disease).
1Extracted sap 
from tobacco 
plant with 
tobacco mosaic 
disease
4Healthy plants became 
infected
2Passed sap 
through a 
porcelain filter 
known to trap 
bacteria
3Rubbed filtered 
sap on healthy 
tobacco plants
What causes tobacco mosaic disease?
. Figure 26.2 Inquiry
Results When the filtered sap was 
rubbed on healthy plants, they be-
came infected. Their sap, extracted 
and filtered, could then act as a 
source of infection for another group 
of plants. Each successive group of 
plants developed the disease to the 
same extent as earlier groups.
Conclusion The infectious agent was apparently not 
a bacterium because it could pass through a bacterium-
trapping filter. The pathogen must have been replicating in 
the plants because its ability to cause disease was undiluted 
after several transfers from plant to plant.
Data from M. J. Beijerinck, Concerning a contagium vivum fluidum as cause of 
the spot disease of tobacco leaves, Verhandelingen der Koninkyke akademie 
Wettenschappen te Amsterdam 65:3–21 (1898). Translation published in English 
as Phytopathological Classics Number 7 (1942), American Phytopathological 
Society Press, St. Paul, MN.
WHAT IF? If Beijerinck had observed that the infection of each group 
was weaker than that of the previous group and that ultimately the 
sap could no longer cause disease, what might he have concluded?
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   611 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 613 ===

612 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Capsids and Envelopes
The protein shell enclosing the viral genome is called a capsid. 
Depending on the type of virus, the capsid may be rod-shaped, 
polyhedral, or more complex in shape. Capsids are built from 
a large number of protein subunits called capsomeres, but the 
number of different kinds of proteins in a capsid is usually small. 
Tobacco mosaic virus has a rigid, rod-shaped capsid made from 
over 1,000 molecules of a single type of protein arranged in a 
helix; rod-shaped viruses are commonly called helical viruses for 
this reason (Figure 26.3a). Adenoviruses, which infect the respi-
ratory tracts of animals, have 252 identical protein molecules 
arranged in a polyhedral capsid with 20 triangular facets—an 
icosahedron; thus, these and other similarly shaped viruses are 
referred to as icosahedral viruses (Figure 26.3b).
Some viruses have accessory structures that help them infect 
their hosts. For instance, a membranous envelope surrounds the 
capsids of influenza viruses and many other viruses found in ani-
mals (Figure 26.3c). These viral envelopes, which are derived 
from the membranes of the host cell, contain host cell phospho-
lipids and membrane proteins. They also contain proteins and 
glycoproteins of viral origin. (Glycoproteins are proteins with 
The simple structure of viruses make them a useful bio-
logical system: To a large extent, molecular biology was born 
in the laboratories of biologists studying viruses that infect 
bacteria. Experiments using these viruses provided evidence 
that genes are made of nucleic acids, and they were critical in 
working out the molecular mechanisms of the fundamental 
processes of DNA replication, transcription, and translation.
Viral Genomes
We usually think of genes as being made of double-stranded 
DNA, but many viruses defy this convention. Their genomes 
may consist of double-stranded DNA, single-stranded DNA, 
double-stranded RNA, or single-stranded RNA, depending on 
the type of virus. A virus is called a DNA virus or an RNA virus 
based on the kind of nucleic acid that makes up its genome. In 
either case, the genome is usually organized as a single linear 
or circular molecule of nucleic acid, although the genomes of 
some viruses consist of multiple molecules of nucleic acid. The 
smallest viruses known have only three genes in their genome, 
while the largest have several hundred to 2,000. For comparison, 
bacterial genomes contain about 200 to a few thousand genes.
40 nm 40 nm
40 nm
Tail
sheath
Tail 
fiber
DNAHead
Capsid:
80 3 225 nm70–90 nm (diameter)
Capsomeres
making up
capsid
18 3 250 nm
RNA Viral
polymerase
Membranous
envelope
Glycoprotein
spikes
RNA-protein
complex
80–200 nm (diameter)
DNA
Capsid
Capsid
Protein spike
40 nm
(a) Tobacco mosaic virus has a 
helical capsid, made up of 
capsomeres, surrounding a 
single helical RNA molecule, with 
the overall shape of a rigid rod.
(b) Adenoviruses have an 
icosahedral capsid with a 
protein spike at each vertex 
(corner). The capsid contains 
double-stranded DNA. 
(c) Influenza viruses have an 
outer envelope, with glycoprotein 
spikes, around a capsid that 
contains eight double-helical 
RNA-protein complexes, each 
associated with a viral polymerase.
(d) Bacteriophage T4, like 
other “T-even” phages, has a 
complex capsid consisting of an 
icosahedral head and a tail 
apparatus. T4's double-stranded 
DNA is enclosed in the head.
. Figure 26.3 Viral structure. Viruses 
are made up of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) 
enclosed in a protein coat (the capsid) and 
sometimes further wrapped in a membranous 
envelope. The individual protein subunits 
making up the capsid are called capsomeres. 
Although diverse in size and shape, viruses 
have many common structural features. (All 
micrographs are colorized TEMs.)
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   612 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 614 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  613
General Features of Viral Replicative Cycles
A viral infection begins when a virus binds to a host cell and 
the viral genome makes its way inside (Figure 26.4). The 
mechanism of genome entry depends on the type of virus and 
the type of host cell. For example, T-even phages use their 
elaborate tail apparatus to inject DNA into a bacterium (see 
Figure 26.3d). Other viruses are taken up by endocytosis or, in 
the case of enveloped viruses, by fusion of the viral envelope 
with the host’s plasma membrane. Once the viral genome 
is inside, the proteins it encodes can commandeer the host, 
reprogramming the cell to copy the viral genome and manu-
facture viral proteins. The host provides the nucleotides for 
making viral nucleic acids, as well as enzymes, ribosomes, 
carbohydrates covalently attached.) Some viruses carry a few viral 
enzymes, such as viral polymerase, within their capsids.
Many of the most complex capsids are found among the 
viruses that infect bacteria, called bacteriophages, or simply 
phages. The first phages studied included seven that infect 
Escherichia coli (E. coli). These seven phages were named type 1  
(T1), type 2 (T2), and so forth, in the order of their discovery. 
(The T2 phage was used in the experiment that established 
DNA as the genetic material; see Figure 16.4.) The three 
“T-even” phages (T2, T4, and T6) turned out to be very similar 
in structure. Their capsids have elongated icosahedral heads 
enclosing their DNA. Attached to the head is a protein tail 
piece with fibers by which the phages attach to a bacterial cell 
(Figure 26.3d). In the next section, we’ll examine how these 
few viral parts function together with cellular components to 
produce large numbers of viral progeny.
CONCEPT CHECK 26.1
1. VISUAL SKILLS Describe one similarity and two differences 
between the structures of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) and 
influenza virus (see Figure 26.3).
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Bacteriophages were used to pro-
vide evidence that DNA carries genetic information (see 
Figure 16.4). Briefly describe the experiment carried out by 
Hershey and Chase, including in your description why the 
researchers chose to use phages.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 26.2
Viruses replicate only in host cells
Viruses lack metabolic enzymes and equipment for making 
proteins, such as ribosomes. They are obligate intracellular 
parasites; in other words, they can replicate only within a host 
cell. It is fair to say that viruses in isolation are merely pack-
aged sets of genes in transit from one host cell to another.
Each particular virus can infect cells of only a limited 
number of host species, called the host range of the virus. 
This host specificity results from the evolution of recognition 
systems by the virus. Viruses usually identify host cells by a 
“handshake” fit between viral surface proteins and specific 
receptor molecules on the outside of cells. Such receptor 
molecules are most often proteins that carry out necessary 
functions for the host cell and have been adopted by viruses 
as portals of entry. Some viruses have broad host ranges. For 
example, West Nile virus and equine encephalitis virus are 
distinctly different viruses that can each infect mosquitoes, 
birds, horses, and humans. Other viruses have host ranges so 
narrow that they infect only a single species. Measles virus, for 
instance, can infect only humans. Furthermore, viral infection 
of multicellular eukaryotes is usually limited to particular tis-
sues. Human cold viruses infect only the cells lining the upper 
respiratory tract, and the HIV seen in Figure 26.1 binds to 
receptors present only on certain types of immune cells.
VIRUS
DNA
HOST CELL
Viral DNA
Viral DNA
mRNA
Capsid
proteins
Capsid
      The virus enters
the cell and is uncoated,
releasing viral DNA
and capsid proteins.
1
      Meanwhile, host
enzymes transcribe the
viral genome into viral
mRNA, which host
ribosomes use to make
more capsid proteins.
      Viral genomes
and capsid proteins
self-assemble into
new virus particles,
which exit the cell.
4
      Host enzymes
replicate the viral
genome.
2
3
. Figure 26.4 A simplified viral replicative cycle. A virus is an 
intracellular parasite that uses the equipment and small molecules 
of its host cell to replicate. In this simplest of viral cycles, the parasite 
is a DNA virus with a capsid consisting of a single type of protein.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Label each of the straight gray arrows to 
identify the process that is occurring. Review Figure 17.25.
 Mastering Biology A n i m a t i o n :  S i m p l i f i e d  V i r a l  R e p l i c a t i v e  C y c l e
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   613 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 615 ===

614 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Replicative Cycles of Phages
Phages are the best understood of all viruses, although some 
of them are also among the most complex. Research on 
phages led to the discovery that some double-stranded DNA 
viruses can replicate by two alternative mechanisms: the lytic 
cycle and the lysogenic cycle.
The Lytic Cycle
A phage replicative cycle that culminates in death of the host 
cell is known as a lytic cycle. The term lytic refers to the last 
stage of infection, during which the bacterium lyses (breaks 
open) and releases the phages that were produced within the 
cell. Each of these phages can then infect a healthy cell, and 
a few successive lytic cycles can destroy an entire bacterial 
population in just a few hours. A phage that replicates only by 
a lytic cycle is a virulent phage. Figure 26.5 illustrates the 
major steps in the lytic cycle of T4, a typical virulent phage.
The Lysogenic Cycle
Instead of lysing their host cells, many phages coexist with 
them in a state called lysogeny. In contrast to the lytic 
cycle, which kills the host cell, the lysogenic cycle allows 
tRNAs, amino acids, ATP, and other components needed for 
making the viral proteins. Many DNA viruses use the DNA 
polymerases of the host cell to synthesize new genomes along 
the templates provided by the viral DNA. In contrast, to rep-
licate their genomes, RNA viruses use virally encoded RNA 
polymerases that can use RNA as a template. (Uninfected cells 
generally make no enzymes for carrying out this process.)
After the viral nucleic acid molecules and capsomeres are 
produced, they spontaneously self-assemble into new viruses. 
In fact, researchers can separate the RNA and capsomeres of 
TMV and then reassemble complete viruses simply by mix-
ing the components together under the right conditions. The 
simplest type of viral replicative cycle ends with the exit of 
hundreds or thousands of viruses from the infected host cell, 
a process that often damages or destroys the cell. Such cellu-
lar damage and death, as well as the body’s responses to this 
destruction, cause many of the symptoms associated with viral 
infections. The viral progeny that exit a cell have the potential 
to infect additional cells, spreading the viral infection.
There are many variations on the simplified viral replicative 
cycle we have just described. We will now take a look at some 
of these variations in bacterial viruses (phages) and animal 
viruses; later in the chapter, we will consider plant viruses.
Release. The phage 
directs production of an 
enzyme that damages the 
bacterial cell wall, allowing 
fluid to enter. The cell 
swells and finally bursts, 
releasing 100 to 200 
phage particles.
5
Attachment. The T4 phage uses 
its tail fibers to bind to specific 
surface proteins on an E. coli cell 
that act as receptors.
1
Entry of phage DNA 
and degradation of host 
DNA. The sheath of the 
tail contracts, injecting the 
phage DNA into the cell 
and leaving an empty 
capsid outside. The cell’s 
DNA is hydrolyzed.
2
Synthesis of viral genomes and 
proteins. The phage DNA directs 
production of phage proteins and 
copies of the phage genome by host  
and viral enzymes, using components 
within the cell.
3Self-assembly. Three separate sets of 
proteins self-assemble to form phage 
heads, tails, and tail fibers. The phage 
genome is packaged inside the capsid as 
the head forms.
4
Phage assembly
Head Tail Tail fibers
c Figure 26.5 The lytic cycle of phage 
T4, a virulent phage. Phage T4 has almost 
300 genes, which are transcribed and 
translated using the host cell’s machinery. 
One of the first phage genes translated 
after the viral DNA enters the host cell 
codes for an enzyme that degrades the 
host cell’s DNA (step 2); the phage DNA 
is protected from breakdown because it 
contains a modified form of cytosine that 
is not recognized by the phage enzyme. 
The entire lytic cycle, from the phage’s first 
contact with the cell surface to cell lysis, 
takes only 20–30 minutes at 37°C.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Phage Lytic Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   614 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 616 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  615
inherits a prophage. A single infected cell can quickly give rise 
to a large population of bacteria carrying the virus in prophage 
form. This mechanism enables viruses to propagate without 
killing the host cells on which they depend.
The term lysogenic signifies that prophages are capable of 
generating active phages that lyse their host cells. This occurs 
when the l genome (or that of another temperate phage) is 
induced to exit the bacterial chromosome and initiate a lytic 
cycle. An environmental signal, such as a certain chemical or 
high-energy radiation, usually triggers the switchover from 
the lysogenic to the lytic mode.
In addition to the gene for the viral protein that prevents 
transcription, a few other prophage genes may be expressed 
during lysogeny. Expression of these genes may alter the 
host’s phenotype, a phenomenon that can have important 
medical significance. For example, the three species of bacte-
ria that cause the human diseases diphtheria, botulism, and 
scarlet fever would not be so harmful to humans without 
certain prophage genes that cause the host bacteria to make 
toxins. And the difference between the E. coli strain in our 
intestines and the O157:H7 strain that has caused several 
deaths by food poisoning appears to be the presence of toxin 
genes of prophages in the O157:H7 strain.
replication of the phage genome without destroying the host. 
Phages capable of using both modes of replicating within 
a bacterium are called temperate phages. A temperate 
phage called lambda, written with the Greek letter l, has been 
widely used in biological research. Phage l resembles T4, but 
its tail has only one short tail fiber.
Infection of an E. coli cell by phage l begins when the 
phage binds to the surface of the cell and injects its linear DNA 
genome (Figure 26.6). Within the host, the l DNA molecule 
forms a circle. What happens next depends on the replicative 
mode: lytic cycle or lysogenic cycle. During a lytic cycle, the 
viral genes immediately turn the host cell into a l-producing 
factory, and the cell soon lyses and releases its virus progeny. 
During a lysogenic cycle, however, the l DNA molecule is 
incorporated into a specific site on the E. coli chromosome by 
viral proteins that break both circular DNA molecules and join 
them to each other. When integrated into the bacterial chro-
mosome in this way, the viral DNA is known as a prophage. 
One prophage gene codes for a protein that prevents transcrip-
tion of most of the other prophage genes. Thus, the phage 
genome is mostly silent within the bacterium. Every time 
the E. coli cell prepares to divide, it replicates the phage DNA 
along with its own chromosome such that each daughter cell 
Phage
DNA The phage attaches to a
host cell and injects its DNA.
Bacterial
chromosome
Tail fiber Phage DNA
circularizes.
Certain factors
determine whether
The bacterium reproduces normally, 
copying the prophage and 
transmitting it to daughter cells.
Occasionally, a prophage 
exits the bacterial chromosome, 
initiating a lytic cycle.
Many cell divisions 
produce a large 
population of 
bacteria infected 
with the prophage.
The cell lyses, releasing phages.
ProphageOR
Phage n
Daughter cell
with prophage
Lytic cycle
lytic cycle
is induced
lysogenic cycle
is entered
Lysogenic cycle
Phage DNA integrates into 
the bacterial chromosome, 
becoming a prophage.
New phage DNA and 
proteins are synthesized and 
self-assemble into phages.
. Figure 26.6 The lytic and lysogenic cycles of phage L, a temperate phage. After entering 
the bacterial cell and circularizing, the l DNA can immediately initiate the production of a large 
number of progeny phages (lytic cycle) or integrate into the bacterial chromosome (lysogenic cycle). 
In most cases, phage l follows the lytic pathway, which is similar to that detailed in Figure 26.5. 
However, once a lysogenic cycle begins, the prophage may be carried in the host cell’s chromosome 
for many generations. Phage l has one main tail fiber, which is short.
 Mastering Biology   
Animation: Phage  Lysogenic 
and Lytic Cycles
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   615 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 617 ===

616 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Bacterial Defenses Against Phages
After reading about the lytic cycle, you may have wondered 
why phages haven’t exterminated all bacteria. Lysogeny is one 
major reason why bacteria have been spared from extinction 
caused by phages. Bacteria also have their own defenses against 
phages. First, natural selection favors bacterial mutants with 
surface proteins that are no longer recognized as receptors by a 
particular type of phage. Second, when phage DNA does enter 
a bacterium, the DNA often is identified as foreign and cut up 
by cellular enzymes called restriction enzymes, which are 
so named because they restrict a phage’s ability to replicate 
within the bacterium. (Restriction enzymes are used in molec-
ular biology and DNA cloning techniques; see Concept 19.1.) 
The bacterium’s own DNA is methylated in a way that prevents 
attack by its own restriction enzymes. A third defense is a sys-
tem present in both bacteria and archaea called the CRISPR-Cas 
system, which you learned about in Concept 17.5.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Videos: Jennifer Doudna:  
CRISPR-Cas9 was First Discovered in Bacteria •  
Jennifer Doudna: Science is a Serendipitous Endeavor
The CRISPR-Cas system was discovered during a study of 
repetitive DNA sequences present in the genomes of many 
prokaryotes. These sequences, which puzzled scientists, were 
named clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPRs) because each sequence reads the same forward and 
backward (a palindrome), with different stretches of “spacer 
DNA” in between the repeats. At first, scientists assumed the 
spacer DNA sequences were random and meaningless, but 
analysis by several research groups showed that each spacer 
sequence corresponded to DNA from a particular phage that had 
infected the cell. Further studies revealed that particular nuclease 
proteins interact with the CRISPR region. These nucleases, called 
Cas (CRISPR-associated) proteins, can identify and cut phage 
DNA, thereby defending the bacterium against phage infection.
When a phage infects a bacterial cell that has the CRISPR-
Cas system, the DNA of the invading phage is stored, integrated 
into the genome between two repeat sequences (Figure 26.7). If 
the cell survives the infection, any further attempt by the same 
type of phage to infect this cell (or its offspring) triggers tran-
scription of the CRISPR region into RNA molecules. These RNAs 
are cut into pieces and then bound by Cas proteins, such as the 
Cas9 protein (see Figure 17.28). The Cas protein uses a portion 
of the phage-related RNA as a homing device to identify the 
invading phage DNA and cut it, leading to its destruction.
Just as natural selection favors bacteria that have recep-
tors altered by mutation or that have enzymes that cut 
phage DNA, it also favors phage mutants that can bind to 
altered receptors or that are resistant to enzymes. Thus, the 
 b a c t e r i u m - p h a g e  r e l a t i o n s h i p  i s  i n  c o n s t a n t  e v o l u t i o n a r y  f l u x .
Replicative Cycles of Animal Viruses
Everyone has suffered from viral infections, whether cold 
sores, influenza, or the common cold. Like all viruses, those 
5¿
Phage
BACTERIAL CELL
DNA from
invading phage
CRISPR region
of DNA
Transcription
Processing
Repeats
RNA transcript
Complementary
RNA
RNA
transcribed
from repeat
DNA from previous
infection by the same
type of phage
DNA from previous
infections by other
phages
1Infection by a phage triggers transcription 
of the CRISPR region of the bacterial 
DNA. This region consists of DNA from 
phages that previously infected the 
cell, separated by repeats.
The RNA transcript is 
processed into short 
RNA strands. Here we 
focus on the RNA that is 
complementary to the 
DNA of the invading 
phage.
2
Each short RNA 
strand binds to a 
Cas protein, 
forming a complex. 
(Multiple complexes 
are formed.)
3
Complementary 
RNA binds to 
DNA from the 
invading phage. 
The Cas protein 
then cuts the 
phage DNA. 
4
After being cut, the 
entire phage DNA 
molecule is degraded 
and can no longer be 
replicated.
5
Cas protein
RNA
Active sites
that cut DNA
Complementary
RNA
DNA from
invading phage
Resulting cut
in phage DNA
Degraded
phage DNA
3¿
5¿ 3¿
5¿
c Computer model of CRISPR-Cas9 
gene editing complex from 
Streptococcus pyogenes
. Figure 26.7 The CRISPR-Cas system: a type of bacterial 
immune system.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with  
Francisco Mojica:   
Discovering CRISPR  
in bacteria
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   616 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 618 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  617
that cause illness in humans and other animals can replicate 
only inside host cells. Many variations on the basic scheme of 
viral infection and replication are represented among the ani-
mal viruses. Key variables are the nature of the viral genome 
(double- or single-stranded DNA or RNA) and the presence or 
absence of an envelope.
Whereas there are only a few bacteriophages that have 
an envelope or RNA genome, many animal viruses have 
both. In fact, nearly all animal viruses with RNA genomes 
have an envelope, as do some with DNA genomes. Rather 
than consider all the mechanisms of viral infection and 
replication, we will focus first on the roles of viral envelopes 
and then on the functioning of RNA as the genetic material 
of many animal viruses.
Viral Envelopes
An animal virus equipped with an envelope—that is, a mem-
branous outer layer—uses it to enter the host cell. Protruding 
from the outer surface of this envelope are viral glycoproteins 
that bind to specific receptor molecules on the surface of a host 
cell. Figure 26.8 outlines the events in the replicative cycle of 
an enveloped virus with an RNA genome. Ribosomes bound to 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of the host cell make the pro-
tein parts of the envelope glycoproteins; cellular enzymes in the 
ER and Golgi apparatus then add the sugars. The resulting viral 
glycoproteins, embedded in membrane derived from the host 
cell, are transported to the cell surface. In a process much like 
exocytosis (see Figure 8.20), new viral capsids are wrapped in 
membrane as they bud from the cell. In other words, the viral 
envelope is usually derived from the host cell’s plasma mem-
brane, although all or most of the molecules of this membrane 
are specified by viral genes. The enveloped viruses are now free 
to infect other cells. This replicative cycle does not necessarily 
kill the host cell, in contrast to the lytic cycles of phages.
Some viruses have envelopes that are not derived from 
plasma membrane. Herpesviruses, for example, are temporar-
ily cloaked in membrane derived from the nuclear envelope of 
the host; they then shed this membrane in the cytoplasm and 
acquire a new envelope made from membrane of the Golgi 
apparatus. These viruses have a double-stranded DNA genome 
and replicate within the host cell nucleus, using a combina-
tion of viral and cellular enzymes to replicate and transcribe 
their DNA. In the case of herpesviruses, copies of the viral 
DNA can remain behind as mini-chromosomes in the nuclei 
of certain nerve cells. There they remain latent until some sort 
of physical or emotional stress triggers a new round of active 
virus production. The infection of other cells by these new 
viruses causes the blisters characteristic of herpes, such as cold 
sores or genital sores. Once someone acquires a herpesvirus 
infection, flare-ups may recur throughout the person’s life.
HOST CELL
Capsid
RNA
Envelope (with
glycoproteins)
Viral genome 
(RNA)
Template
ER
Glyco-
proteins
Capsid
proteins Copy of
genome (RNA)
mRNA
      Glycoproteins on the viral envelope 
bind to receptors (not shown) on the
host cell. For some viruses, the envelope
fuses with the plasma membrane;
others enter by endocytosis.
1
      The capsid and viral genome
enter the cell. Digestion of the
capsid by cellular enzymes releases
the viral genome.
2
      The viral genome (red)
functions as a template for 
synthesis of complementary 
RNA strands (pink) by a viral 
RNA polymerase.
3
      New copies of viral
genome RNA are made
using the complementary 
RNA strands as templates.
4
      Each new virus buds
from the cell, its enve-
lope studded with viral
glycoproteins embedded
in membrane derived
from the host cell.
8
      A capsid assembles
around each viral
genome molecule.
7
      Vesicles transport
envelope glycoproteins to
the plasma membrane.
6
      Complementary RNA
strands also function as mRNA,
which is translated into both
capsid proteins (in the cytosol)
and glycoproteins for the viral
envelope (in the ER and
Golgi apparatus).
5
. Figure 26.8 The replicative cycle of an enveloped RNA virus. Shown here is a virus with 
a single-stranded RNA genome that functions as a template for synthesis of mRNA.
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   617 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 619 ===

618 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
animal viruses (classes IV–VI in Table 26.1). The genome of class 
IV viruses can directly serve as mRNA and thus can be translated 
into viral protein immediately after infection. Figure 26.8 shows 
a virus of class V, in which the RNA genome serves instead as a 
template for mRNA synthesis. The RNA genome is transcribed into 
complementary RNA strands, which function both as mRNA and 
as templates for the synthesis of additional copies of genomic 
RNA. All viruses that use an RNA genome as a template for mRNA 
transcription require RNA S RNA synthesis. These viruses use a 
viral enzyme capable of carrying out this process; there are no such 
enzymes in most cells. The enzyme used in this process is encoded 
by the viral genome. After the protein is synthesized, it is packaged 
during viral self-assembly with the genome inside the viral capsid.
The RNA animal viruses with the most complicated replica-
tive cycles are the retroviruses (class VI). These viruses have 
an enzyme called reverse transcriptase that transcribes an 
RNA template into a DNA copy, an RNA S DNA information 
flow that is the opposite of the usual direction. This unusual 
phenomenon is the source of the name retroviruses (retro 
means “backward”). Of particular medical importance is HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus), the retrovirus shown in 
Figure 26.1 that causes AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome). HIV and other retroviruses are enveloped viruses 
that contain two identical molecules of single-stranded RNA 
and two molecules of reverse transcriptase.
The HIV replicative cycle (illustrated in Figure 26.9) is typical 
of a retrovirus. After HIV enters a host cell, its reverse transcriptase 
molecules are released into the cytoplasm, where they catalyze 
synthesis of viral DNA. The newly made viral DNA then enters 
the cell’s nucleus and integrates into the DNA of a chromosome. 
The integrated viral DNA, called a provirus, never leaves the 
host’s genome, remaining a permanent resident of the cell. (Recall 
that a prophage, in contrast, leaves the host’s genome at the start 
of a lytic cycle.) The RNA polymerase of the host transcribes the 
proviral DNA into RNA molecules, which can function both as 
mRNA for the synthesis of viral proteins and as genomes for the 
new viruses that will be assembled and released from the cell. In 
Concept 47.4, we describe how HIV causes the deterioration of 
the immune system that occurs in AIDS.
Evolution of Viruses
EVOLUTION We began this chapter by asking whether or not 
viruses are alive. Viruses do not really fit our definition of liv-
ing organisms. An isolated virus is biologically inert, unable to 
replicate its genes or regenerate its own ATP. Yet it has a genetic 
program written in the universal language of life. Do we think 
of viruses as nature’s most complex associations of molecules or 
as the simplest forms of life? Either way, we must bend our usual 
definitions. Although viruses cannot replicate or carry out meta-
bolic activities independently, their use of the genetic code makes 
it hard to deny their evolutionary connection to the living world.
How did viruses originate? Viruses have been found that 
infect every form of life—not only bacteria, animals, and plants, 
Viral Genetic Material
Table 26.1 shows the common classification system for animal 
viruses, which is based on their genetic material: double- or 
single-stranded DNA, or double- or single-stranded RNA, with 
further classification of RNA viruses. Although some phages 
and most plant viruses are RNA viruses, the broadest variety of 
RNA genomes is found among the viruses that infect animals. 
There are three types of single-stranded RNA genomes found in 
Class/Family Envelope?
Examples That Cause Human 
Diseases
I. Double-Stranded DNA (dsDNA)
Adenovirus 
(see Figure 26.3b)
No Respiratory viruses
Papillomavirus No Warts, cervical cancer
Polyomavirus No Tumors
Herpesvirus Yes Herpes simplex I and II (cold 
sores, genital sores); varicella 
zoster (shingles, chicken pox); 
Epstein-Barr virus (mononucleo-
sis, Burkitt’s lymphoma)
Poxvirus Yes Smallpox virus; cowpox virus
II. Single-Stranded DNA (ssDNA)
Parvovirus No B19 parvovirus (mild rash)
III. Double-Stranded RNA (dsRNA)
Reovirus No Rotavirus (diarrhea); Colorado 
tick fever virus
IV. Single-Stranded RNA (ssRNA); Serves as mRNA
Picornavirus No Rhinovirus (common cold); 
poliovirus; hepatitis A virus; 
other intestinal viruses
Coronavirus Yes Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS); Middle East 
respiratory syndrome (MERS)
Flavivirus Yes Zika virus (see Figure 26.10c); 
yellow fever virus; dengue virus; 
West Nile virus; hepatitis C virus
Togavirus Yes Chikungunya virus (see 
Figure 26.10b); rubella virus; 
equine encephalitis viruses
V. ssRNA; Serves as Template for mRNA Synthesis
Filovirus Yes Ebola virus (hemorrhagic fever; 
see Figure 26.10a)
Orthomyxovirus Yes Influenza virus (see Figure 26.3c)
Paramyxovirus Yes Measles virus; mumps virus
Rhabdovirus Yes Rabies virus
VI. ssRNA; Serves as Template for DNA Synthesis
Retrovirus Yes Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV/AIDS; see Figure 26.9); 
human T-lymphotropic virus 
type 1 (HTLV-1) (leukemia)
Table 26.1 Classes of Animal Viruses
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   618 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 620 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  619
MAKE CONECTIONS Describe what is known about 
binding of HIV to immune system cells. (See Figure 8.8.) 
How was this discovered?
HOST CELL
Reverse
transcriptase
Viral RNA
Viral 
capsid 
proteins
Capsid
Viral envelopeGlycoprotein
Reverse
transcriptase
RNA (two
identical
strands)
HIV
Single strand
of DNA
HIV Membrane of
white blood cell
HIV entering a cell
New HIV leaving a cell
Double-stranded
DNA
ER
RNA genome
for the
progeny 
viruses
mRNA
NUCLEUS
Provirus
Chromosomal
DNA
    The double-
stranded DNA
is incorporated
as a provirus
into the cell’s
DNA.
6
5  Reverse 
transcriptase
catalyzes the 
synthesis of a
second DNA 
strand comple-
mentary to the 
first.
5
    Proviral
genes are
transcribed into
RNA molecules,
which serve as
genomes for
progeny viruses 
and as mRNAs for
translation into
viral protein.
7
    Reverse transcriptase catalyzes 
the synthesis of a DNA strand, 
using the viral RNA as a template 
and then hydrolyzing it.
4
1      The envelope
glycoproteins enable the
virus to bind to specific
receptors (not shown) on 
certain white blood cells.
    Viral envelope
glycoproteins are
made in the ER.
8
    Viral capsid proteins and
reverse transcriptase are
made in the cytosol.
9
    Vesicles transport the
glycoproteins to the cell’s
plasma membrane.
10    Capsids are
assembled around
viral genomes and
reverse transcriptase 
molecules.
11
    New viruses, with viral
envelope glycoproteins, bud
from the host cell.
0.25 om
     The capsid proteins are removed, 
releasing the viral proteins, RNA,
and reverse transcriptase.
3     The virus fuses with
the host cell’s plasma 
membrane.
2
12
. Figure 26.9 The replicative cycle of HIV, the retrovirus 
that causes AIDS. The photos on the left (artificially colored TEMs) 
show HIV entering and leaving a human white blood cell. See 
Figure 8.8 for the cell-surface proteins that act as receptors for HIV. 
Note in step 6 that DNA synthesized from the viral RNA genome 
is integrated as a provirus into the host cell chromosomal DNA, a 
characteristic unique to retroviruses.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: HIV Replicative Cycle  
Animation: Retrovirus (HIV) Replicative Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   619 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 621 ===

620 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
The ongoing evolutionary relationship between viruses 
and the genomes of their host cells is an association that 
continues to make viruses very useful experimental systems 
in molecular biology. Knowledge about viruses also allows 
many practical applications, since viruses have a tremendous 
impact on all organisms through their ability to cause disease.
but also archaea, fungi, and algae and other protists. Researchers 
estimate that each milliliter (one-fifth of a teaspoon) of seawater 
contains between one and 100 million viruses, ten times the 
number of microorganisms! Because viruses depend on cells for 
their own propagation, it seems likely that viruses are not the 
descendants of precellular forms of life but evolved—possibly 
multiple times—after the first cells appeared. Most molecular 
biologists favor the hypothesis that viruses originated from 
naked bits of cellular nucleic acids that moved from one cell to 
another, perhaps via injured cell surfaces. The evolution of genes 
coding for capsid proteins may have allowed viruses to bind cell 
membranes, thus facilitating the infection of uninjured cells.
Candidates for the original sources of viral genomes include 
plasmids and transposons. Plasmids are small, circular DNA mol-
ecules found in bacteria and in the unicellular fungi called yeasts. 
Plasmids exist apart from the genome, can replicate indepen-
dently of the genome, and are occasionally transferred between 
cells. Transposons are DNA segments that can move from one 
location to another within a cell’s genome. Thus, plasmids, 
transposons, and viruses all share an important feature: They are 
mobile genetic elements. (We’ll discuss plasmids in more detail in 
Concepts 19.1 and 27.2 and transposons in Concept 20.4.)
Consistent with this notion of pieces of DNA shuttling 
from cell to cell is the observation that a viral genome can 
have more in common with the genome of its host than with 
the genomes of viruses that infect other hosts. Indeed, some 
viral genes are essentially identical to genes of the host.
Debate about the origin of viruses was reinvigorated about 
20 years ago when an extremely large virus was discovered: 
Mimivirus is a  double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) virus with an ico-
sahedral capsid that is 400 nm in diameter, the size of a small bac-
terium. Its genome contains 1.2 million bases (Mb)—about 100 
times as many as the influenza virus genome—and an estimated 
1,000 genes. Perhaps the most surprising aspect of mimivirus, 
however, was that its genome included genes previously found 
only in cellular genomes. Some of these genes code for proteins 
involved in translation, DNA repair, protein folding, and polysac-
charide synthesis. Whether mimivirus evolved before the first cells 
and then developed an exploitative relationship with them or 
evolved more recently and simply scavenged genes from its hosts 
is not yet settled.
In the past decade, several even larger viruses have been 
discovered that cannot be classified with any existing known 
virus. One such virus is 1 µm (1,000 nm) in diameter, with a 
dsDNA genome of around 2–2.5 Mb, larger than that of some 
small eukaryotes. What’s more, over 90% of its 2,000 or so 
genes are unrelated to cellular genes, inspiring the name it 
was given, pandoravirus. The number of genes in pandoravi-
ruses varies from 1,500 to 2,500 genes. A second virus, called 
Pithovirus sibericum, with a diameter of 1.5 !m and 500 genes, 
was discovered in permanently frozen soil in Siberia. This 
virus, once thawed, was able to infect an amoeba after being 
frozen for 30,000 years! How these and all other viruses fit in 
the tree of life is an intriguing, unresolved question.
CONCEPT CHECK 26.2
1. Compare the effect on the host cell of a lytic (virulent) 
phage and a lysogenic (temperate) phage.
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare the CRISPR-Cas system 
with the miRNA system discussed in Concept 18.3, including 
their mechanisms and their functions.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS The RNA virus in Figure 26.8 has a 
viral RNA polymerase that functions in step 3 of the virus’s 
replicative cycle. Compare this with a cellular RNA polymerase 
in terms of template and overall function (see Figure 17.10).
4. Why is HIV called a retrovirus?
5. VISUAL SKILLS Looking at Figure 26.9, imagine you are a 
researcher trying to combat HIV infection. What molecular 
processes could you attempt to block?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 26.3
Viruses and prions are formidable 
pathogens in animals and plants
Diseases caused by viral infections afflict humans, agricul-
tural crops, and livestock worldwide. Other smaller, less com-
plex entities known as prions also cause disease in animals. 
We’ll first consider animal viruses.
Viral Diseases in Animals
A viral infection can produce symptoms by a number of dif-
ferent mechanisms. Viruses may damage or kill cells by caus-
ing the release of hydrolytic enzymes from lysosomes. Some 
viruses cause infected cells to produce toxins that lead to 
disease symptoms, and some have molecular components 
that are toxic, such as envelope proteins. How much damage 
a virus causes depends partly on the ability of the infected tis-
sue to regenerate by cell division. People usually recover com-
pletely from colds because the epithelium of the respiratory 
tract, which the viruses infect, can efficiently repair itself. In 
contrast, damage inflicted by poliovirus to mature nerve cells 
is permanent because these cells do not divide and usually can-
not be replaced. Many of the temporary symptoms associated 
with viral infections, such as fever and body aches, actually 
result from the body’s own efforts to defend itself against infec-
tion rather than from cell death caused by the virus.
The immune system is a critical part of the body’s natural 
defenses (see Chapter 47). It is also the basis for the major medi-
cal tool used to prevent viral infections—vaccines. A vaccine is 
a harmless derivative of a pathogen that stimulates the immune 
system to mount defenses against the harmful pathogen. 
Smallpox, a viral disease that was once a devastating scourge in 
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   620 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 622 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  621
many parts of the world, was eradicated by 1980 due to a vac-
cination program carried out by the World Health Organization 
(WHO). The very narrow host range of the smallpox virus—it 
infects only humans—was a critical factor in the success of this 
program. Similar worldwide vaccination campaigns are under 
way to eradicate polio, the incidence of which has dropped by 
99%, and measles. Although an effective vaccine exists for mea-
sles, a large outbreak occurred in the Pacific Northwest in 2019, 
correlated with lower vaccination rates in that region. Effective 
vaccines are also available to protect against rubella, mumps, 
hepatitis B, and a number of other viral diseases.
Although vaccines can prevent some viral illnesses, medical 
care can do little, at present, to cure most viral infections once 
they occur. The antibiotics that help us recover from bacterial 
infections are powerless against viruses. Antibiotics kill bacteria 
by inhibiting enzymes specific to bacteria but have little or no 
effect on eukaryotic or virally encoded enzymes. However, the 
few enzymes that are encoded only by viruses have provided 
targets for other drugs. Most antiviral drugs resemble nucleo-
sides and thus interfere with viral nucleic acid synthesis. One 
such drug is acyclovir, which impedes herpesvirus replication by 
inhibiting the viral polymerase that synthesizes viral DNA but 
not the eukaryotic one. Similarly, azidothymidine (AZT) curbs 
HIV replication by interfering with the synthesis of DNA by 
reverse transcriptase. In the past 30 years, much effort has gone 
into developing drugs to treat HIV. Currently, multidrug treat-
ments, sometimes called “cocktails,” are considered to be most 
effective. Such treatments commonly include a combination of 
two nucleoside mimics and a protease inhibitor, which interferes 
with an enzyme required for assembly of the viruses. Multidrug 
treatments originally involved taking up to 20 pills multiple 
times per day but now usually consist of a single daily tablet. 
Another effective treatment involves a drug called maraviroc, 
which blocks a protein on the surface of human immune cells 
that helps bind the HIV virus (see Figure 8.8). This drug has also 
been used successfully to prevent infection in individuals who 
either have been exposed to, or are at risk of exposure to, HIV.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation:  
Treating HIV Infection with a Reverse  
Transcriptase Inhibitor
Emerging Viral Diseases
Viruses that suddenly become apparent 
are often referred to as emerging viruses. 
HIV, the AIDS virus, is a classic exam-
ple: It appeared in San Francisco in the 
early 1980s, seemingly out of nowhere, 
although later studies uncovered a case 
in the Belgian Congo in 1959. Some 
other dangerous emerging viruses 
cause encephalitis, inflammation of 
the brain. One example is the West Nile 
virus, which appeared in North America 
in 1999 and has spread to 49 U.S. states, by 2019 resulting in 
over 50,000 cases and about 2,000 deaths.
The deadly Ebola virus (Figure 26.10a), recognized ini-
tially in 1976 in central Africa, is one of several emerging 
viruses that cause hemorrhagic fever, an often fatal illness 
characterized by fever, vomiting, massive bleeding, and cir-
culatory system collapse. In 2014, a widespread outbreak, or 
epidemic, of Ebola virus occurred. By 2016, it had resulted 
in over 11,000 deaths. In 2017, 2018, and 2019, smaller out-
breaks occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The mosquito-borne chikungunya virus (Figure 26.10b) 
causes an acute illness with fever, rashes, and persistent joint 
pain. Chikungunya has long been considered a tropical virus, 
but it has now appeared in Italy, France, and Spain. The Zika 
virus (Figure 26.10c) was first observed in Uganda in 1947, 
but for decades only a few cases occurred per year. In the 
spring of 2015, however, it became an emerging virus when 
it caused a large outbreak in Brazil. Although symptoms of 
Zika are often mild, the infection of pregnant women was 
correlated with a striking increase in the number of babies 
born with abnormally small brains, a condition called micro-
cephaly. Zika is a  mosquito-borne flavivirus (like West Nile 
virus) that infects neural cells, posing a particular danger to 
fetal brain development.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Genetically  
Modified Mosquitoes 
Where do these new strains of virus come from? One cause 
of rapidly emerging viral diseases in humans is mutation of 
existing viruses into new viruses that can spread more easily. 
RNA viruses have a high rate of mutation because viral RNA 
polymerases do not proofread and correct errors in replicating 
their RNA genomes. Some mutations change existing viruses 
into new viral strains that can cause disease, even in people 
immune to the original virus. A well-known related example 
is how three or four mutations causing changes in a surface 
protein of a cat virus (feline panleukopenia virus) resulted in 
the emergence in 1978 of canine parvovirus, a very contagious 
deadly virus infecting dogs.
(a) Ebola viruses 
budding from a monkey 
cell (colorized SEM).
(b) Chikungunya viruses 
emerging from a cell in the 
upper left and packing 
together (colorized TEM).
(c) Computer-generated 
image of a Zika virus, 
based on a technique called 
cryo-electron microscopy.
20 nm
200 nm500 nm
. Figure 26.10 Emerging viruses.
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   621 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 623 ===

622 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
transmission from birds to people, rather than person-to-
person. Epidemics occur when genetic changes allow a new 
viral strain to be easily transmitted between humans. An 
event like this occurred in 2009, when a strain of influenza 
virus (H1N1) appeared that was very different from the virus 
that causes the seasonal flu. The H1N1 influenza virus spread 
rapidly, prompting WHO to declare a global epidemic, or 
pandemic. Within half a year, the disease had reached 207 
countries, infecting over 600,000 people and killing almost 
8,000. In addition to the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, influenza A 
strains have caused three other major flu epidemics among 
humans in the last 100 years. The most notable of these was 
the “Spanish flu” pandemic of 1918–1919, which killed 40–50 
million people worldwide. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, 
you’ll analyze genetic changes in variants of the 2009 H1N1 
influenza virus and correlate them with spread of the disease.
The disease caused by H1N1 was originally called “swine flu” 
because parts of the viral genome were very similar to strains of 
influenza in pigs. However, studies revealed that the virus was 
not transmitted from pigs to humans. Instead, the story was more 
complex: H1N1 was a unique combination of swine, avian, and 
human influenza genes that allowed it to spread among humans.
Influenza viruses can change quickly because they have a 
genome made up of nine segments of RNA rather than a single 
RNA molecule. When an animal like a pig or a bird is infected 
with multiple strains of influenza virus, the RNA molecules 
making up the viral genomes can mix and match (reassort) dur-
ing viral assembly, resulting in new genetic combinations. If a 
flu virus from pigs recombines with viruses that circulate widely 
among humans, it may acquire the ability to spread easily from 
person to person, dramatically increasing the potential for a 
major human outbreak. Pigs are believed to have been the main 
hosts for recombination that led to the 2009 H1N1 flu virus.
Influenza viruses also have a high rate of mutation, for 
reasons mentioned earlier. Coupled with reassortments, these 
mutations can lead to the emergence of a viral strain from 
animals that can infect human cells. Scientists are worried 
that the H5N1 strain will evolve in a way that enables it to 
spread as easily as the H1N1 strain. This would represent a 
major global health threat like that of the 1918 pandemic.
How easily could this capability evolve in the H5N1 strain? 
In 2011, scientists working with ferrets, small mammals used 
as model organisms for the human flu, found that only a 
few mutations of the avian flu virus were sufficient to allow 
infection of cells in the human nasal cavity and windpipe. 
Furthermore, when the scientists transferred nasal swabs seri-
ally from ferret to ferret, the virus became transmissible through 
the air. Reports of this startling discovery ignited a firestorm 
of debate about whether to publish the results. Ultimately, the 
scientific community decided the benefits of preventing pan-
demics outweighed the risks of the information being used for 
harmful purposes, and the work was published in 2012.
Normal seasonal flu viruses (including influenza types A 
and B) are not considered emerging viruses because variations 
A second cause of the emergence of viral diseases is the spread 
of a viral disease from a small, isolated human population.  
HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, went unnamed and virtually 
unnoticed for decades before spreading around the world. In this 
case, technological and social factors, including affordable inter-
national travel, blood transfusions, unprotected sexual inter-
course, and reuse of needles to inject intravenous drugs, allowed 
a previously rare human disease to become a global scourge.
 Mastering Biology 
Interview with David Satcher: The role of the 
CDC in recognizing AIDS and in public health
A third cause of new viral diseases in humans is the spread 
of existing viruses from other animals. Scientists estimate that 
about three-quarters of new human diseases originate in this 
way. Animals infected with a virus that can be transmitted to 
humans are said to be a natural reservoir for that virus. HIV is 
an example, as scientists believe that it originated from a ver-
sion of the virus found in chimpanzees in central Africa, after 
people ate chimpanzee meat for food and were infected by 
exposure to chimpanzee blood.
In general, flu epidemics provide an instructive example of 
these three causes of emerging viruses. There are three types 
of influenza virus: types B and C, which infect only humans 
and have never caused an epidemic, and type A, which infects 
a wide range of animals, including birds, pigs, horses, and 
humans. The influenza type A viruses present in pigs and wild 
and domestic birds are potential emerging viruses that repre-
sent a long-term threat to human health.
A case in point is the H5N1 strain of avian influenza 
virus, which is highly contagious and deadly in birds. The 
first transmission from birds to humans was documented in 
Hong Kong in 1997. Since then, about 700 people have been 
infected, with an alarming mortality rate of greater than 50%. 
The high mortality rate is partly because H5N1 is very dif-
ferent from strains of influenza that have circulated among 
humans for a long time. Individuals are therefore not able to 
mount a strong immune response against viruses like H5N1.
Different strains of influenza A are given standardized names; 
for example, the name H5N1 identifies which forms of two viral 
surface proteins are present—hemagglutinin and neuramini-
dase (HA and NA, respectively; see the glycoprotein spikes in 
Figure 26.3c). These two proteins together help determine the 
host range and severity of disease caused by each virus. As of 
2017, 18 types of hemagglutinin, a protein that helps the flu 
virus attach to host cells, and 11 types of neuraminidase, an 
enzyme that helps release new virus particles from infected cells, 
have been identified. All possible combinations of HA and NA 
have been found in some waterbirds. In 2018, researchers using 
advanced microscopy techniques reported that the HA protein is 
quite dynamic, stretching toward the target host cell, retracting, 
then refolding to a new shape and re-approaching the target cell.
Although deadly, the H5N1 strain has not yet caused an 
epidemic because nearly all cases have been the result of 
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   622 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 624 ===

 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  623
How Can Sequence Data Be Used to Track Flu Virus 
Evolution? I n  2 0 0 9 ,  a n  i n f l u e n z a  A  H 1 N 1  v i r u s  c a u s e d  a  p a n-
demic, and the virus has continued to resurface in outbreaks across 
the world. Researchers in Taiwan were curious about why the virus 
kept appearing despite widespread flu vaccine initiatives. They 
hypothesized that newly evolved variant strains of the H1N1 
virus were able to evade human immune system defenses. To 
test this hypothesis, they needed to determine if each wave of 
flu infection was caused by a different H1N1 variant strain.
How the Experiment Was Done S c i e n t i s t s  o b t a i n e d  t h e  g e-
nome sequences for 4,703 virus isolates collected from patients 
with H1N1 flu in Taiwan, each named by type/location/identi-
fying number/year. They compared the sequences in different 
strains for the viral hemagglutinin (HA) gene, and based on 
mutations that had occurred, arranged the isolates into a 
phylogenetic tree (see Figure 22.5 for information on how 
to read phylogenetic trees).
Data from the Experiment In the phylogenetic tree, 
each branch tip is one variant strain of the H1N1 virus 
with a unique HA gene sequence. The tree is a way to 
visualize a working hypothesis about the evolutionary 
relationships between H1N1 variants.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. The more closely connected two variants are in 
the tree, the more alike they are in terms of HA 
gene sequence. Each fork in a branch, called a 
node, shows where two lineages separate due to 
different accumulated mutations. The length of the 
branches is a measure of how many sequence differences 
there are between the variants, indicating how distantly related 
they are. Referring to the phylogenetic tree, which variants 
are more closely related to each other: A/Taiwan/1018/2011 
and A/Taiwan/552/2011 or A/Taiwan/1018/2011 and A/
Taiwan/8542/2009? Explain your answer.
2. The scientists arranged the branches into groups made up 
of one ancestral variant and all of its descendant, mutated 
variants. They are color-coded in the figure. Using group 
11 as an example, trace the lineage of its variants. (a) Do all 
of the nodes have the same number of branches or branch 
tips? (b) Are all of the branches in the group the same length? 
(c) What do these results indicate?
3. The graph shows the number of isolates collected (each from an 
ill patient) on the y-axis and the month and year that the isolates 
were collected on the x-axis. Each group of variants is plotted 
separately with a line color that matches the tree diagram. 
(a) Which group of variants was the earliest to cause the first 
wave of H1N1 flu in over 100 patients in Taiwan? (b) After a 
group of variants had a peak number of infections, did mem-
bers of that same group cause another (later) wave of infec-
tion? (c) One variant in group 1 (green, uppermost branch) 
was used to make a vaccine that was distributed very early in 
the pandemic. Based on the graphed data, does it look like the 
vaccine was effective?
4. Groups 9, 10, and 11 all had H1N1 variants that caused a large 
number of infections at the same time in Taiwan. Does this mean 
that the scientists’ hypothesis, that new variants cause new waves 
of infection, was incorrect? Explain your answer.
Analyzing a Sequence-Based Phylogenetic 
Tree to Understand Viral Evolution
Scientific Skills Exercise
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Data from J.-R. Yang et al., New variants and age shift to high fatality groups 
 contribute to severe successive waves in the 2009 influenza pandemic in Taiwan, 
PLoS ONE 6(11): e28288 (2011).
c H1N1 flu 
vaccination
A/California/07/2009 Group 1
Group 6
Group 9
Group 3
Group 7
Group 8
Group 8-1
Group 10
Group 11
A/Taiwan/1164/2010
A/Taiwan/T1773/2009
A/Taiwan/7418/2009
A/Taiwan/T0826/2009
A/Taiwan/1017/2009
A/Taiwan/11706/2009
A/Taiwan/6341/2009
A/Taiwan/6200/2009
A/Taiwan/6078/2009
A/Taiwan/7873/2009
A/Taiwan/T1338/2009
A/Taiwan/T0724/2009
A/Taiwan/T1821/2009
A/Taiwan/937/2009
A/Taiwan/8575/2009
A/Taiwan/T1339/2009
A/Taiwan/940/2009
A/Taiwan/8542/2009
A/Taiwan/2826/2009
A/Taiwan/4909/2009
A/Taiwan/552/2011
A/Taiwan/1018/2011
A/Taiwan/3994/2010
A/Taiwan/5270/2010
A/Taiwan/4611/2011
A/Taiwan/5506/2011
A/Taiwan/1150/2011
A/Taiwan/2883/2011
A/Taiwan/842/2010
A/Taiwan/3697/2011
A/Taiwan/1749/2011
A/Taiwan/67/2011
A/Taiwan/4501/2011
A/Taiwan/1102/2011
A/Taiwan/2649/2011
Wave 1Wave 2 Wave 3Interwave800
700
600
500
400
300
100
0
200
MJ J JASO ND FM
2009 2010 2011
MJ JAS NDJ FM AA
Number of viral isolates
O
Groups 1, 3, 6
Group 7
Group 8
Group 8-1
Group 9
Group 10
Group 11
Key
m Scientists graphed the number of isolates by the month and year 
of isolate collection to show the period in which each viral variant 
was actively causing illness in people.
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   623 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 625 ===

624 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
due to destruction of  
crops. Common signs of 
viral infection include 
bleached or brown spots on leaves  
and fruits (Figure 26.12), stunted growth,  
and damaged flowers or roots, all of which  
can diminish the yield and quality of crops.
Plant viruses have the same basic structure and mode  
of replication as animal viruses. Most known plant viruses, 
including tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), have an RNA genome. 
Many have a helical capsid, like TMV, while others have  
an icosahedral capsid (see Figure 26.3b).
Viral diseases of plants spread by two major routes. In the 
first route, horizontal transmission, an external source infects 
the plant. Because the invading virus must get past the plant’s 
outer protective layer of cells (the epidermis), a plant becomes 
more susceptible to viral infections if it has been damaged by 
wind, injury, or herbivores. Herbivores, especially insects, pose 
a double threat because they can also carry viruses, transmitting 
disease from plant to plant. Moreover, gardeners may transmit 
plant viruses inadvertently on pruning shears and other tools. 
The other route of viral infection is vertical transmission, in 
which a plant inherits a viral infection from a parent. Vertical 
transmission can occur in asexual propagation (for example, 
through cuttings) or in sexual reproduction via infected seeds.
Once a virus enters a plant cell and begins replicating, viral 
genomes and associated proteins can spread throughout the plant 
through plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic connections that pen-
etrate the walls between adjacent plant cells (see Figure 36.19). 
The passage of viral macromolecules from cell to cell is facilitated 
by virally encoded proteins that cause enlargement of plasmo-
desmata. Scientists have not yet devised cures for most viral plant 
diseases, so research efforts are focused largely on reducing disease 
transmission and on breeding resistant varieties of crop plants.
Prions: Proteins as Infectious Agents
The viruses discussed in this chapter are infectious agents 
that spread diseases, and their genetic material is composed 
of nucleic acids, whose ability to be replicated is well known. 
Surprisingly, there are also proteins that are infectious. Proteins 
called prions appear to cause degenerative brain diseases in 
various animal species. These diseases include scrapie in sheep; 
mad cow disease, which plagued the European beef industry 
about 20 years ago; and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans, 
which has caused the death of some 175 people in the United 
Kingdom since 1996. Prions can be transmitted in food, as 
may occur when people eat beef from cattle with mad cow 
disease. Kuru, another human disease caused by prions, was 
identified in the early 1900s among the South Fore indigenous 
people of New Guinea. When a kuru epidemic peaked there 
in the 1960s, scientists at first thought the disease had a 
genetic basis because family members also often contracted 
the disease. Eventually, however, investigations revealed a 
of seasonal flu viruses have been circulating among humans 
for long enough that most components are recognized by the 
immune system. However, these viruses still undergo muta-
tion and reassortment of genome segments, and variations of 
the HA protein are used each year to generate vaccines against 
the strains predicted most likely to occur the following year.
As we have seen, emerging viruses are usually existing viruses 
that mutate, spread more widely in the current host species, or 
spread to new host species. Changes in host behavior or envi-
ronmental changes can increase the viral traffic responsible for 
emerging diseases. For instance, new roads built through remote 
areas can allow viruses to spread between previously isolated 
human populations. Also, the destruction of forests to expand 
cropland can bring humans into contact with animals that host 
infectious viruses. Finally, genetic mutations and changes in host 
ranges can allow viruses to jump between species. Many viruses 
are transmitted by mosquitoes. A dramatic expansion of the dis-
ease caused by the chikungunya virus occurred in the mid-2000s 
when a mutation allowed it to infect not only the mosquito spe-
cies Aedes aegypti but also the related Aedes albopictus. Insecticides 
and mosquito netting over beds are crucial tools in public health 
attempts to prevent diseases carried by mosquitoes (Figure 26.11).
. Figure 26.11 Netting as protection against virus-carrying 
mosquitoes.
c Figure 26.12  
Immature tomato 
infected by a virus.
Recently, scientists have become concerned about the pos-
sible effects of climate change on worldwide viral transmission. 
Dengue fever, also mosquito-borne, has appeared in Florida and 
Portugal, regions where it had not been seen before. The pos-
sibility that global climate change has allowed mosquito spe-
cies carrying these viruses to expand their ranges and interact 
more is troubling because of the increased chance of a mutation 
allowing a virus to jump to a new host. This is an area of active 
research by scientists applying climate change models to what 
is known about the habitat requirements of mosquito species.
Viral Diseases in Plants
More than 2,000 types of viral diseases of plants are known, 
accounting for an annual loss of over $30 billion worldwide  
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   624 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 626 ===

New
prion
Original
prion
Aggregates
of prions
Normal
protein
Prion
c Figure 26.13 Model for how prions 
propagate. Prions are misfolded versions of 
normal brain proteins. When a prion contacts 
a normally folded version of the same protein, 
it may induce the normal protein to assume 
the abnormal shape. The resulting chain 
reaction may continue until high levels of 
prion aggregation cause cellular malfunction 
and eventual degeneration of the brain.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Prions: Characteristics • Animation: Prions: Diseases
Several prions then aggregate into a complex that can con-
vert other normal proteins to prions, which join the chain 
(Figure 26.13). Prion aggregation interferes with normal 
cellular functions and causes disease symptoms. This model 
was greeted with much skepticism when it was first proposed 
by Stanley Prusiner in the early 1980s, but it is now widely 
accepted. Prusiner was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1997 for 
his work on prions. He has also proposed that prions are 
involved in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s disease. There are many outstanding ques-
tions about these small infectious agents.
different story: After a death, family members practiced ritual 
cannibalism, eating organs of the deceased, and prions were 
transmitted primarily in brain tissue. Women got kuru more 
often than men because men ate the more “prestigious” organs, 
like the heart, while women and children ate the brains.
Two characteristics of prions are especially alarming. First, 
prions act very slowly, with an incubation period of at least ten 
years before symptoms develop. The lengthy incubation period 
prevents sources of infection from being identified until long 
after the first cases appear, allowing many more infections to 
occur. Second, prions are not destroyed or deactivated by heat-
ing to normal cooking temperatures. To date, there is no known 
cure for prion diseases, and the only hope for developing effec-
tive treatments lies in understanding the process of infection.
How can a protein, which cannot replicate itself, be a 
transmissible pathogen? According to the leading model, 
a prion is a misfolded form of a protein normally present in 
brain cells. When the prion gets into a cell containing the 
normal form of the protein, the prion somehow converts 
normal protein molecules to the misfolded prion versions. 
CONCEPT CHECK 26.3
1. Describe two ways in which a preexisting virus can become 
an emerging virus.
2. Prions do not contain genetic material and, therefore, cannot 
replicate themselves. How do they then cause diseases?
3. WHAT IF? TMV has been isolated from virtually all com-
mercial tobacco products. Why, then, is TMV infection not an 
additional hazard for smokers?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
26 Chapter Review
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 26.1
A virus consists of a nucleic acid surrounded by  
a protein coat (pp. 611–613)
• Researchers discovered viruses in the late 1800s by studying a 
plant disease, tobacco mosaic disease.
• A virus is a small nucleic acid genome enclosed in a  
protein capsid and sometimes a membranous viral  
envelope. The genome may be single- or double-stranded  
DNA or RNA.
? Are viruses generally considered living or nonliving? Explain.
CONCEPT 26.2
Viruses replicate only in host cells (pp. 613–620)
• Viruses use enzymes, ribosomes, and small molecules of host cells 
to synthesize progeny viruses during replication.
• Each type of virus has a characteristic host range, affected by 
whether cell-surface proteins are present that viral surface pro-
teins can bind to.
• Phages (viruses that infect bacteria) can replicate by two alterna-
tive mechanisms: the lytic cycle and the lysogenic cycle.
Phage DNA
Prophage
The phage attaches to a 
host cell and injects its DNA.
Bacterial
chromosome
Lytic cycle
• Virulent or temperate phage
• Destruction of host DNA
• Production of new phages
• Lysis of host cell causes release 
   of progeny phages
Lysogenic cycle
•
•
Temperate phage only
Genome integrates into bacterial
chromosome as prophage, which
(1) is replicated and passed on to
daughter cells and
(2) can be induced to leave the 
chromosome and initiate a lytic cycle
 CHAPTER 26  Introduction to Viruses  625
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   625 3/14/20   3:30 AM

=== SIDE 627 ===

626 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY When bacteria infect an animal, the 
number of bacteria in the body increases in an exponential 
fashion (graph A). After infection by a virulent animal virus 
with a lytic replicative cycle, there is no evidence of infection 
for a while. Later, however, the number of viruses rises suddenly 
and subsequently increases in a series of steps (graph B). 
Explain the difference in the curves.
TimeNumber of bacteria
A
Number of viruses
Time
B
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION While viruses 
are considered by most scientists to be nonliving, they do 
show some characteristics of life, including the correlation 
of structure and function. In a short essay (100–150 words), 
discuss how the structure of a virus correlates with its function.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu), an antiviral 
drug prescribed for the flu, inhibits the 
enzyme neuraminidase. Explain how 
this drug could prevent infection in 
someone exposed to the flu or could 
shorten the course of flu in an infected 
patient (the reasons for which it is prescribed).
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
• Bacteria have various ways of defending themselves against phage 
infections, including the CRISPR-Cas system.
• Many animal viruses have an envelope. Retroviruses (such as 
HIV) use the enzyme reverse transcriptase to copy their RNA 
genome into DNA, which can be integrated into the host genome 
as a provirus.
• Since viruses can replicate only within cells, they probably 
evolved after the first cells appeared, perhaps as packaged frag-
ments of cellular nucleic acid.
? Describe enzymes that are not found in most cells but are necessary 
for the replication of certain types of viruses.
CONCEPT 26.3
Viruses and prions are formidable pathogens  
in animals and plants (pp. 620–625)
• Symptoms of viral diseases may be caused by direct viral harm to 
cells or by the body’s immune response. V accines stimulate the 
immune system to defend the host against specific viruses.
• An epidemic, a widespread outbreak of a disease, can become a 
pandemic, a global epidemic.
• Outbreaks of emerging viral diseases in humans are usually not 
new, but rather are caused by existing viruses that expand their 
host territory. The H1N1 2009 flu virus was a new combination 
of pig, human, and avian viral genes that caused a pandemic. The 
H5N1 avian flu virus has the potential to cause a high-mortality 
flu pandemic.
• Viruses enter plant cells through damaged cell walls (hori-
zontal transmission) or are inherited from a parent (vertical 
transmission).
• Prions are slow-acting, virtually indestructible infectious pro-
teins that cause brain diseases in mammals.
? What aspect of an RNA virus makes it more likely than a DNA virus to 
become an emerging virus?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. DRAW IT Redraw Figure 26.8 to show the replicative cycle 
of a virus with a single-stranded genome that can function as 
mRNA (a class IV virus).
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION The success of some viruses lies in 
their ability to evolve rapidly within the host. Such viruses evade 
the host’s defenses by mutating and producing many altered 
progeny viruses before the body can mount an attack. Thus, the 
viruses present late in infection differ from those that initially 
infected the body. Discuss this as an example of evolution in 
microcosm. Which viral lineages tend to predominate?
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How can genomics help track the Ebola virus?
Go to “Ebola Outbreak Traced to the Funeral of a Traditional Healer”
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C26_PRF.indd   626 3/14/20   3:31 AM

=== SIDE 628 ===

627
Figure 27.1 The pink color of this lake in Spain is a sign that its waters are much 
saltier than seawater. Its color is caused not by minerals or other nonliving sources, 
but by trillions of prokaryotes that thrive in salinities that kill other cells. Other 
prokaryotes live in environments that are far too cold or hot or acidic for most 
other organisms.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 27
• Figure 27.13 Walkthrough: Conjugation 
and Recombination in E. coli
• Animation: Structure and Reproduction 
of Bacteria
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Calculating and 
Interpreting Means and Standard Errors
• Tutorial: Genetic Transfer in Bacteria
27.1 Structural and functional 
adaptations contribute to 
prokaryotic success p. 628
27.2 Rapid reproduction, mutation, and 
genetic recombination promote 
genetic diversity in prokaryotes p. 632
27.3 Diverse nutritional and metabolic 
adaptations have evolved in 
prokaryotes p. 635
27.4 Prokaryotes have radiated into  
a diverse set of lineages p. 637
27.5 Prokaryotes play crucial roles in  
the biosphere p. 640
27.6 Prokaryotes have both beneficial and 
harmful impacts on humans p. 641
KEY CONCEPTS
Prokaryotes27
Study Tip
Make a table: As you read the chapter, 
identify examples of challenging 
environments in which prokaryotes 
thrive. List the structural, metabolic, 
or other features of prokaryotes that 
contribute to their success in each of 
these environments.
Environmental
challenge
Prokaryotic feature
enabling success
Lack of water
Exposure to
antibiotics
Capsule or slime layer
Endospore
(resistant cell that
can enable bacterium
to survive harsh conditions)
Protective coat
Population size (N)
Time
What characteristics enable prokaryotes to reach huge 
population sizes and thrive in diverse environments?
Due to the organisms’ small size and
rapid reproduction, prokaryotic popu-
lations can reach enormous numbers.
Because prokaryotic populations are so
large, mutations produce high genetic
diversity, enabling rapid evolution.
Rapid evolution in prokaryotic
populations results in diverse
metabolic and structural adaptations.
Their diverse adaptations
enable prokaryotes to live in a
wide range of environments.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   627 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 629 ===

628 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
1 om
1 om
3 om
(a) Spherical (b) Rod-shaped (c) Spiral
. Figure 27.2 The most common shapes of prokaryotes. 
(a) Cocci (singular, coccus) are spherical prokaryotes. They can occur 
singly, in chains of two or more cells, and in clusters resembling 
bunches of grapes. (b) Bacilli (singular, bacillus) are rod-shaped 
prokaryotes. They are usually solitary, but in some forms the rods 
are arranged in chains. (c) Spiral prokaryotes include spirochetes 
(shown here), which are corkscrew-shaped; other spiral prokaryotes 
resemble commas or loose coils (colorized SEMs).
Finally, although they are unicellular and small, prokaryotes 
are well organized, achieving all of an organism’s life func tions  
within a single cell.
Cell-Surface Structures
A key feature of nearly all prokaryotic cells is the cell wall, 
which maintains cell shape, protects the cell, and prevents it 
from bursting in a hypotonic environment (see Figure 8.13). 
In a hypertonic environment, most prokaryotes lose water 
and shrink away from their wall. Such water losses can inhibit 
cell reproduction. Thus, salt can be used to preserve foods 
because it causes food-spoiling prokaryotes to lose water, 
 preventing them from reproducing rapidly.
The cell walls of prokaryotes differ in structure from those 
of eukaryotes. In eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as 
plants and fungi, the walls are usually made of cellulose or 
chitin (see Concept 5.2). In contrast, most bacterial cell walls 
contain peptidoglycan, a polymer composed of modified 
sugars cross-linked by short polypeptides. This molecular fab-
ric encloses the entire bacterium and anchors other molecules 
that extend from its surface. Archaeal cell walls contain a vari-
ety of polysaccharides and proteins but lack peptidoglycan.
Using a technique called the Gram stain, developed by 
the 19th-century Danish physician Hans Christian Gram, 
scientists can categorize many bacterial species according to 
differences in cell wall composition. To do this, samples are 
first stained with crystal violet dye and iodine, then rinsed 
in alcohol, and finally stained with the red dye safranin, 
which enters the cell and binds to its DNA. The structure 
of a bacterium’s cell wall determines the staining response 
(Figure 27.3). Gram-positive bacteria have relatively simple 
walls composed of a thick layer of peptidoglycan. The walls 
of gram-negative bacteria have less peptidoglycan and are 
structurally more complex, with an outer membrane that con-
tains lipopolysaccharides (carbohydrates bonded to lipids).
Gram staining is a valuable tool in medicine for quickly 
determining if a patient’s infection is due to gram-negative 
or to gram-positive bacteria. This information has treatment 
implications. The lipid portions of the lipopolysaccharides 
in the walls of many gram-negative bacteria are toxic, caus-
ing fever or shock. Furthermore, the outer membrane of a 
gram-negative bacterium helps protect it from the body’s 
defenses. Gram-negative bacteria also tend to be more resis-
tant than gram-positive species to antibiotics because the 
outer membrane impedes the entry of some drugs. However, 
some gram-positive species have virulent strains that are 
resistant to one or more antibiotics. (Figure 21.14 discusses 
one example: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or 
MRSA, which can cause lethal skin infections.)
The effectiveness of certain antibiotics, such as penicillin, 
derives from their inhibition of peptidoglycan cross-linking. 
The resulting cell wall may not be functional, particularly in 
Prokaryotes, the single-celled organisms that make up domains 
Bacteria and Archaea, can thrive in a wide range of extreme 
environments. Prokaryotic species are also very well adapted to 
more “normal” habitats—the lands and waters in which most 
other species are found. Their ability to adapt to a broad range of 
habitats helps explain why prokaryotes are the most abundant or-
ganisms on Earth. Indeed, the number of prokaryotes in a handful 
of fertile soil is greater than the number of people who have ever 
lived. In this chapter, we’ll examine the adaptations, diversity, 
and enormous ecological impact of these remarkable organisms.
CONCEPT 27.1
Structural and functional adaptations 
contribute to prokaryotic success
The first organisms to inhabit Earth were prokaryotes that lived 
3.5 billion years ago (see Concept 25.3). Throughout their long 
evolutionary history, prokaryotic populations have been (and 
continue to be) subjected to natural selection in all kinds of 
environments, resulting in their enormous diversity today.
We’ll begin by describing prokaryotes. Most prokaryotes 
are unicellular, although the cells of some species remain 
attached to each other after cell division. Prokaryotic cells 
typically have diameters of 0.5–5 µm, much smaller than 
the 10- to 100-µm diameter of many eukaryotic cells. (One 
notable exception, Thiomargarita namibiensis, can be as 
large as 750 µm in diameter—bigger than a poppy seed.) 
Prokaryotic cells have a variety of shapes (Figure 27.2). 
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   628 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 630 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 629
lack water or essential nutrients (Figure 27.5). The original 
cell produces a copy of its chromosome and surrounds that 
copy with a multilayered structure, forming the endospore. 
Water is removed from the endospore, and its metabolism 
halts. The original cell then lyses, releasing the endospore. 
Most endospores are so durable that they can survive in boil-
ing water; killing them requires heating lab equipment to 
121°C under high pressure. In less hostile environments, 
endospores can remain dormant but viable for centuries, 
able to rehydrate and resume metabolism when their 
environment improves.
Finally, some prokaryotes stick to their substrate or to one 
another by means of hairlike appendages called fimbriae 
gram-positive bacteria. Such drugs destroy many species of 
pathogenic bacteria without adversely affecting human cells, 
which do not have peptidoglycan.
The cell wall of many prokaryotes is surrounded by a 
sticky layer of polysaccharide or protein. This layer is called a 
capsule if it is dense and well-defined (Figure 27.4) or a slime 
layer if it is not as well organized. Both kinds of sticky outer 
layers enable prokaryotes to adhere to their substrate or to 
other individuals in a colony. Capsules and slime layers also 
protect against dehydration, and some capsules shield patho-
genic prokaryotes from attacks by their host’s immune system.
In another way of withstanding harsh conditions, certain 
bacteria develop resistant cells called endospores when they 
Gram-positive
bacteria
Gram-negative
bacteria
10 om
(a) Gram-positive bacteria (b) Gram-negative bacteria
Plasma membrane
Cell
wallPeptido-
glycan
layer
Outer
membrane
Carbohydrate portion
of lipopolysaccharide
Cell
wall
Peptido-
glycan
layer
Plasma
membrane
Gram-positive bacteria stain a darker color and have a thick cell 
wall made of peptidoglycan.
Gram-negative bacteria have a thinner layer of peptidoglycan 
located between the plasma membrane and an outer membrane. 
. Figure 27.3 Gram staining.
Bacterial
capsule
Tonsil
cell
Bacterial
cell wall
200 nm
. Figure 27.4 Capsule. The polysaccharide capsule around this 
Streptococcus bacterium enables the prokaryote to attach to cells in 
the respiratory tract—in this colorized TEM, a tonsil cell.
Endospore
Coat
Bacterium
0.5 om
. Figure 27.5 An endospore. Bacillus anthracis, the bacterium that 
causes the disease anthrax, produces endospores (TEM). An endospore’s 
protective, multilayered coat helps it survive in the soil for years.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   629 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 631 ===

630 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
(singular, fimbria) (Figure 27.6). For example, the bacterium 
that causes gonorrhea, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, uses fimbriae to 
fasten itself to the mucous membranes of its host. Fimbriae 
are usually shorter and more numerous than pili (singular, 
pilus), appendages that pull two cells together prior to DNA 
transfer from one cell to the other (see Figure 27.12); pili are 
sometimes referred to as sex pili.
Motility
About half of all prokaryotes are capable 
of taxis, a directed movement toward 
or away from a stimulus (from the Greek 
taxis, to arrange). For example, pro-
karyotes that exhibit chemotaxis change 
their movement pattern in response to 
chemicals. They may move toward nutri-
ents or oxygen (positive chemotaxis) or 
away from a toxic substance (negative 
chemotaxis). Some species can move at 
velocities exceeding 50 µm/sec—up to 50 
times their body length per second. For 
perspective, consider that a person 1.7 m 
tall moving that fast would be running 
306 km (190 miles) per hour!
Of the various structures that enable 
prokaryotes to move, the most common 
are flagella (Figure 27.7). Flagella (singu-
lar, flagellum) may be scattered over the 
entire surface of the cell or concentrated at 
one or both ends. Prokaryotic flagella dif-
fer greatly from eukaryotic flagella: They 
are one-tenth the width and typically 
are not covered by an extension of the 
plasma membrane (see Figure 7.24). The 
flagella of prokaryotes and eukaryotes also 
1 om
Fimbriae
. Figure 27.6 Fimbriae. These numerous protein-containing 
appendages enable some prokaryotes to attach to surfaces or to 
other cells (colorized TEM).
Filament
Hook
Motor
Flagellum
Cell wall
Plasma
membrane
Peptidoglycan
layerRod
20 nm
. Figure 27.7 A prokaryotic flagellum. The motor of a prokaryotic flagellum consists of a 
system of protein rings embedded in the cell wall and plasma membrane (TEM). The electron 
transport chain pumps protons out of the cell. The diffusion of protons back into the cell provides 
the force that turns a curved hook and thereby causes the attached filament to rotate and propel 
the cell. (This diagram shows flagellar structures characteristic of gram-negative bacteria.)
VISUAL SKILLS Predict which of the four protein rings shown in this diagram are likely 
hydrophobic. Explain your answer.
 Mastering Biology Video: Prokaryotic Flagella
differ in their molecular composition and their mechanism 
of propulsion. Among prokaryotes, bacterial and archaeal 
flagella are similar in size and rotational mechanism, but they 
are composed of entirely different and unrelated proteins. 
Overall, these structural and molecular comparisons indicate 
that the flagella of bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes arose 
independently. Since current evidence shows that the flagella 
of organisms in the three domains perform similar functions 
but are not related by common descent, they are described as 
analogous, not homologous, structures (see Concept 21.3).
Evolutionary Origins of Bacterial Flagella
The bacterial flagellum shown in Figure 27.7 has three main 
parts (the motor, hook, and filament) that are themselves 
composed of 42 different kinds of proteins. How could such 
a complex structure evolve? In fact, much evidence indicates 
that bacterial flagella originated as simpler structures that were 
modified in a stepwise fashion over time. As in the case of the 
human eye (see Concept 25.6), biologists asked whether a less 
complex version of the flagellum could still benefit its owner. 
Analyses of hundreds of bacterial genomes indicate that only 
half of the flagellum’s protein components appear to be neces-
sary for it to function; the others are inessential or not encoded 
in the genomes of some species. Of the 21 proteins required by 
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   630 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 632 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 631
prokaryotes lack a nucleus; their chromosome is located in 
the nucleoid, a region of cytoplasm that is not enclosed by 
a membrane. In addition to its single chromosome, a typical 
prokaryotic cell may also have much smaller rings of inde-
pendently replicating DNA molecules called plasmids (see 
Figure 27.9), most carrying only a few genes.
Although DNA replication, transcription, and transla-
tion are fundamentally similar processes in prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes, some of the details differ (see Chapter 17). For 
example, prokaryotic ribosomes are slightly smaller than 
eukaryotic ribosomes and differ in their protein and RNA 
content. These differences allow certain antibiotics, such 
as erythromycin and tetracycline, to bind to ribosomes and 
block protein synthesis in prokaryotes but not in eukaryotes. 
As a result, people can use these antibiotics to kill or inhibit 
the growth of bacteria without harming themselves.
Reproduction
Many prokaryotes can reproduce quickly in favorable environ-
ments. By binary fission (see Figure 12.12), a single prokaryotic 
cell divides into 2 cells, which then divide into 4, 8, 16, and so 
on. Under optimal conditions, many prokaryotes can divide 
every 1–3 hours; some species can produce a new generation 
in only 20 minutes. At this rate, a single prokaryotic cell could 
give rise to a colony outweighing Earth in only two days!
In reality, of course, this does not occur. The cells even-
tually exhaust their nutrient supply, poison themselves 
with metabolic wastes, face competition from other micro-
organisms, or are consumed by other organisms. Still, the 
potential of many prokaryotic species for rapid population 
all species studied to date, 19 are modified versions of proteins 
that perform other tasks in bacteria. For example, a set of 10 
proteins in the motor is homologous to 10 similar proteins in a 
secretory system found in bacteria. (A secretory system is a pro-
tein complex that enables a cell to produce and release certain 
macromolecules.) Two other proteins in the motor are homol-
ogous to proteins that function in ion transport. The proteins 
that comprise the rod, hook, and filament are all related to 
each other and are descended from an ancestral protein that 
formed a pilus-like tube. These findings suggest that the bac-
terial flagellum evolved as other proteins were added to an 
ancestral secretory system. This is an example of exaptation, the 
process in which structures originally adapted for one function 
take on new functions through descent with modification.
Internal Organization and DNA
The cells of prokaryotes are simpler than those of eukaryotes 
in both their internal structure and the physical arrangement 
of their DNA (see Figure 7.5). Prokaryotic cells lack the com-
plex compartmentalization associated with the membrane-
enclosed organelles found in eukaryotic cells. However, some 
prokaryotic cells do have specialized membranes that per-
form metabolic functions (Figure 27.8). These membranes are 
usually infoldings of the plasma membrane. Recent discover-
ies also indicate that some prokaryotes can store metabolic 
by-products in simple compartments that are made out of 
proteins; these compartments do not have a membrane.
The genome of a prokaryote is structurally different from 
a eukaryotic genome and in most cases has considerably less 
DNA. Prokaryotes typically have one circular chromosome 
(Figure 27.9), whereas eukaryotes usually have several to 
many linear chromosomes. In addition, in prokaryotes the 
chromosome is associated with many fewer proteins than 
are the chromosomes of eukaryotes. Also unlike eukaryotes, 
Thylakoid
membrane
Respiratory
membrane
(a) Aerobic prokaryote (b) Photosynthetic prokaryote
0.5 om0.2 om
. Figure 27.8 Specialized membranes of prokaryotes. 
(a) Infoldings of the plasma membrane, reminiscent of the cristae 
of mitochondria, function in cellular respiration in some aerobic 
prokaryotes (TEM). (b) Photosynthetic prokaryotes called cyanobacteria 
have thylakoid membranes, much like those in chloroplasts (TEM).
1 om
Chromosome
Plasmids
. Figure 27.9 A prokaryotic chromosome and plasmids. The 
thin, tangled loops surrounding this ruptured Escherichia coli cell are 
parts of the cell’s large, circular chromosome (colorized TEM). Three 
of the cell’s plasmids, the much smaller rings of DNA, are also shown.
VISUAL SKILLS Identify and label the third plasmid visible in this 
micrograph.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   631 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 633 ===

632 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
mutations when all 4,300 E. coli genes are considered is about  
4,300*2,000—more than 8 million per day per human host.
The key point is that new mutations, though rare on a 
per gene basis, can increase genetic diversity quickly in spe-
cies with short generation times and large populations. This 
diversity, in turn, can lead to rapid evolution (Figure 27.10):  
growth emphasizes three key features of their biology: They 
are small, they reproduce by binary fission, and they often have 
short generation times. As a result, prokaryotic populations 
can consist of many trillions of individuals—far more than 
populations of multicellular eukaryotes, such as plants 
or animals.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Structure and Reproduction  
of Bacteria
CONCEPT CHECK 27.1
1. Describe two adaptations that enable prokaryotes to survive 
in environments too harsh for other organisms.
2. Why are most of the pathogenic bacteria gram- 
negative? 
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Suggest a hypothesis that explains 
why the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts resemble those 
of cyanobacteria. Refer to Figures 7.18 and 22.21.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 27.2
Rapid reproduction, mutation, and 
genetic recombination promote 
genetic diversity in prokaryotes
As we discussed in Unit Four, evolution cannot occur with-
out genetic variation. The diverse adaptations exhibited by 
prokaryotes suggest that their populations must have consid-
erable genetic variation—and they do. In this section, we’ll 
examine three factors that give rise to high levels of genetic 
diversity in prokaryotes: rapid reproduction, mutation, and 
genetic recombination.
Rapid Reproduction and Mutation
Most of the genetic variation in sexually reproducing species 
results from the way existing alleles are arranged in new com-
binations during meiosis and fertilization (see Concept 13.4). 
Prokaryotes do not reproduce sexually, so at first glance their 
extensive genetic variation may seem puzzling. But in many 
species, this variation can result from a combination of rapid 
reproduction and mutation.
Consider the bacterium Escherichia coli as it reproduces 
by binary fission in a human intestine, one of its natural 
environments. After repeated rounds of division, most of 
the offspring cells are genetically identical to the original 
parent cell. However, if errors occur during DNA replica-
tion, some of the offspring cells may differ genetically. The 
probability of such a mutation occurring in a given E. coli 
gene is about one in 10 million 11*10-72 per cell divi-
sion. But among the 2*1010 new E. coli cells that arise 
each day in a person’s intestine, there will be approxi-
mately 12*10102*11*10-72=2,000 bacteria that  
have a  mutation in that gene. The total number of new 
Experiment Researchers 
tested the ability of 
E. coli populations to 
adapt to a new environ-
ment. They established 
12 populations, each 
founded by a single cell 
from an E. coli strain, 
and followed these 
populations for 20,000 
generations (3,000 days). 
To maintain a continual supply of resources, each day the 
researchers performed a serial transfer: They transferred 0.1 mL 
of each population to a new tube containing 9.9 mL of fresh 
growth medium. The growth medium used throughout the 
experiment provided a challenging environment that con-
tained only low levels of glucose and other resources needed 
for growth.
Samples were periodically removed from the 12 popula-
tions and grown in competition with the common ancestral 
strain in the experimental (low-glucose) environment.
Results The fitness of the experimental populations, as 
measured by the growth rate of each population, increased 
rapidly for the first 5,000 generations (2 years) and more 
slowly for the next 15,000 generations. The graph shows the 
averages for the 12 populations.
1.8
0 5,000 10,000
Generation
Experimental
populations (average)
Ancestral population
15,000 20,000
Population growth rate
(relative to ancestral population)
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
Conclusion P o p u l a t i o n s  o f  E. coli continued to accumulate 
beneficial mutations for 20,000 generations, allowing rapid 
evolution of increased population growth rates in their new 
environment.
Data from V. S. Cooper and R. E. Lenski, The population genetics of ecological 
specialization in evolving Escherichia coli populations, Nature 407:736–739 (2000).
WHAT IF? Suggest possible functions of the genes whose sequence 
or expression was altered as the experimental populations evolved in 
the low-glucose environment.
Can prokaryotes evolve rapidly in response  
to environmental change?
/uni25BC Figure 27.10 Inquiry
Old tube
(discarded
after
transfer)
New tube
(9.9 mL
growth
medium)
0.1 mL
(population sample)
Daily serial transfer
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   632 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 634 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 633
Individuals that are genetically better equipped for their 
environment tend to survive and reproduce at higher 
rates than other individuals. The ability of prokaryotes 
to adapt rapidly to new conditions highlights the point 
that although the structure of their cells is simpler than 
that of eukaryotic cells, prokaryotes are not “primitive” 
or “inferior” in an evolutionary sense. They are, in fact, 
highly evolved: For 3.5 billion years, prokaryotic popu-
lations have responded successfully to many types of 
environmental challenges.
Genetic Recombination
Although new mutations are a major source of variation in 
prokaryotic populations, additional diversity arises from 
genetic recombination, the combining of DNA from two 
sources. In eukaryotes, the sexual processes of meiosis and 
fertilization combine DNA from two individuals in a single 
zygote. But meiosis and fertilization do not occur in pro-
karyotes. Instead, three other mechanisms—transformation, 
transduction, and conjugation—can bring together pro-
karyotic DNA from different individuals (that is, different 
cells). When the individuals are members of different species, 
this movement of genes from one organism to another is 
called horizontal gene transfer. Scientists have found evidence 
that each of these mechanisms can transfer DNA within 
and between species in both domain Bacteria and domain 
Archaea. To date, however, most of our knowledge comes 
from research on bacteria.
Transformation and Transduction
In transformation, the genotype and possibly pheno-
type of a prokaryotic cell are altered by the uptake of for-
eign DNA from its surroundings. For example, a harmless 
strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae can be transformed into 
pneumonia-causing cells if the cells are exposed to DNA from 
a pathogenic strain (see Figure 16.2). This transformation 
occurs when a nonpathogenic cell takes up a piece of DNA 
carrying the allele for pathogenicity and replaces its own 
allele with the foreign allele, an exchange of homologous 
DNA segments. The cell is now a recombinant: Its chromo-
some contains DNA derived from two different cells.
For many years after transformation was discovered in 
laboratory cultures, most biologists thought it was too rare 
and haphazard to play an important role in natural bacterial 
populations. But researchers have since learned that many 
bacteria have cell-surface proteins that recognize DNA from 
closely related species and transport it into the cell. Once 
inside the cell, the foreign DNA can be incorporated into the 
genome by homologous DNA exchange.
In transduction, phages (short for “bacteriophages,” 
the viruses that infect bacteria) carry prokaryotic genes 
from one host cell to another. In most cases, transduc-
tion results from accidents that occur during the phage 
A+
Phage DNA
Recombinant cell
Donor
cell
B+
A+B+
A+
A+
A–B–
B–
A+
Crossing over
Recipient
cell
A phage infects a bacterial cell
that carries the A+ and B+ alleles 
on its chromosome (brown). 
This bacterium will be the
“donor” cell.
1
The phage DNA is replicated, and
the cell makes many copies of phage 
proteins (represented as purple dots). 
Certain phage proteins halt the 
synthesis of proteins encoded by 
the host cell’s DNA, and the host
cell’s DNA may be fragmented, 
as shown here.
2
As new phage particles assemble, 
a fragment of bacterial DNA carrying 
the A+ allele happens to be packaged 
in a phage capsid.
3
The phage carrying the A+ allele
from the donor cell infects a recipient
cell with alleles A– and B–.
Crossing over at two sites (dotted
lines) allows donor DNA (brown)
to be incorporated into recipient
DNA (green).
4
The genotype of the resulting
recombinant cell (A+B–) differs from
the genotypes of both the donor 
(A+B+) and the recipient (A–B–).
5
. Figure 27.11 Transduction. Phages may carry pieces of 
a bacterial chromosome from one cell (the donor) to another 
(the recipient). If crossing over occurs after the transfer, genes 
from the donor may be incorporated  
into the recipient’s genome.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, describe the circumstances in 
which a transduction event would result in horizontal gene transfer.
replicative cycle (Figure 27.11). A virus that carries prokary-
otic DNA may not be able to replicate because it lacks some 
or all of its own genetic material. However, the virus can 
attach to another prokaryotic cell (a recipient) and inject 
prokaryotic DNA acquired from the first cell (the donor). 
If some of this DNA is then incorporated into the recipient 
cell’s chromosome by crossing over, a recombinant cell 
is formed.
Conjugation and Plasmids
In a process called conjugation, DNA is transferred between 
two prokaryotic cells (usually of the same species) that are 
temporarily joined. In bacteria, the DNA transfer is always 
one-way: One cell donates the DNA, and the other receives it. 
We’ll focus here on the mechanism used by E. coli.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   633 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 635 ===

634 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
First, a pilus of the donor cell attaches to the recipient 
(Figure 27.12). The pilus then retracts, pulling the two cells 
together, like a grappling hook. The next step is thought 
to be the formation of a temporary structure between the 
two cells, a “mating bridge” through which the donor may 
transfer DNA to the recipient. However, the mechanism 
by which DNA transfer occurs is unclear; indeed, recent 
evidence indicates that DNA may pass directly through the 
hollow pilus.
The ability to form pili and donate DNA during 
conjugation results from the presence of a particular piece  
of DNA called the F factor (F for fertility). The F factor 
of E. coli consists of about 25 genes, most required for the 
production of pili. As shown in Figure 27.13, the F factor can 
F plasmid Bacterial chromosome
Bacterial
chromosome
F+ cell
(donor)
Recombinant
F– bacterium
Mating
bridge
F factor
(a)
F– cell
(recipient)
F+ cell
F+ cell
1A cell carrying an F plasmid 
(an F+ cell) forms a mating 
bridge with an F– cell. One 
strand of the plasmid’s DNA 
breaks at the point marked 
by the arrowhead.
2Using the unbroken strand as a tem-
plate, the cell synthesizes a new strand 
(light blue). Meanwhile, the broken 
strand peels off (red arrow), and one 
end enters the F– cell. There, synthesis 
of its complementary strand begins.
3DNA replication continues
in both the donor and
recipient cells, as the 
transferred plasmid strand 
moves farther into the 
recipient cell.
4Once DNA transfer and 
synthesis are completed, 
the plasmid in the recipi-
ent cell circularizes. The 
recipient cell is now a 
recombinant F+ cell.
Conjugation and transfer of an F plasmid
(b)Conjugation and transfer of part of an Hfr bacterial chromosome, resulting in recombination. A+/A– and 
B+/B– indicate alleles for gene A and gene B, respectively. 
1In an Hfr cell, the F factor 
(dark blue) is integrated 
into the bacterial chromo-
some. Since an Hfr cell 
has all of the F factor 
genes, it can form a 
mating bridge with an 
F– cell and transfer DNA.
2A single strand of the F 
factor breaks and begins to 
move through the bridge. 
DNA replication occurs in 
both donor and recipient cells, 
resulting in double-stranded 
DNA (daughter strands shown 
in lighter color).
3The mating bridge usually breaks 
before the entire chromosome 
is transferred. Crossing over at 
two sites (dotted lines) can result 
in the exchange of homologous 
genes (here, A+ and A–) between 
the transferred DNA (brown) and the 
recipient’s chromosome (green).
4Cellular enzymes degrade 
any linear DNA not 
incorporated into the 
chromosome. The 
recipient cell, with a new 
combination of genes but 
no F factor, is now a 
recombinant F– cell.
A+A+
A–A–
A+Hfr cell
(donor)
F– cell
(recipient)
B+
B+
B+ A+
B+
B– B–B– B–
A– A+A+ A–
A+
. Figure 27.13 Conjugation and recombination in E. coli. The DNA replication that accompanies 
transfer of an F plasmid or part of an Hfr bacterial chromosome is called rolling circle replication. 
In effect, the intact circular parental DNA strand “rolls” as its other strand peels off and a new 
complementary strand is synthesized.
 Mastering Biology  
Figure Walkthrough
Pilus
1 om
. Figure 27.12 Bacterial conjugation. The E. coli donor cell (left) 
extends a pilus that attaches to a recipient cell, a key first step in the 
transfer of DNA. The pilus is a flexible tube of protein subunits (TEM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   634 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 636 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 635
exist either as a plasmid or as a segment of DNA within the 
bacterial chromosome.
The F Factor as a Plasmid The F factor in its plasmid form 
is called the F plasmid. Cells containing the F plasmid, des-
ignated F+ cells, function as DNA donors during conjugation 
(see Figure 27.13a). Cells lacking the F factor, designated F-, 
function as DNA recipients during conjugation. The F+ condi-
tion is transferable in the sense that an F+ cell converts an  
F- cell to F+ if a copy of the entire F plasmid is transferred. 
Even if this does not occur, as long as some of the F plasmid’s 
DNA is transferred successfully to the recipient cell, that cell 
is now a recombinant cell.
The F Factor in the Chromosome Chromosomal genes 
can be transferred during conjugation when the donor cell’s 
F factor is integrated into the chromosome. A cell with the 
F factor built into its chromosome is called an Hfr cell (for 
high frequency of recombination). Like an F+ cell, an Hfr 
cell functions as a donor during conjugation with an F- cell 
(see Figure 27.13b). When chromosomal DNA from an Hfr 
cell enters an F- cell, homologous regions of the Hfr and F- 
chromosomes may align, allowing segments of their DNA to 
be exchanged. As a result, the recipient cell becomes a recom-
binant bacterium that has genes derived from the chromo-
somes of two different cells—a new genetic variant on which 
evolution can act.
R Plasmids and Antibiotic Resistance Many species of 
bacteria have genes that code for enzymes that specifically 
destroy or otherwise hinder the effectiveness of certain an-
tibiotics, such as tetracycline or ampicillin. Such “resistance 
genes” are often carried by plasmids known as R plasmids 
(R for resistance). Many R plasmids, like F plasmids, have 
genes that encode pili and enable DNA transfer from one 
bacterial cell to another by conjugation. As a result, R plas-
mids and the resistance genes they carry can spread rapidly 
through a bacterial population—a problem of great public 
health concern (see Concept 27.6). Making the problem still 
worse, some R plasmids carry genes for resistance to as many 
as ten antibiotics.
CONCEPT CHECK 27.2
1. Although rare on a per gene basis, new mutations can add 
considerable genetic variation to prokaryotic populations in 
each generation. Explain how this occurs.
2. Distinguish between the three mechanisms by which bacte-
ria can transfer DNA from one bacterial cell to another.
3. WHAT IF? If a nonpathogenic bacterium were to acquire 
resistance to antibiotics, could this strain pose a health risk to 
people? In general, how does DNA transfer among bacteria 
affect the spread of resistance genes?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 27.3
Diverse nutritional and metabolic 
adaptations have evolved in 
prokaryotes
The extensive genetic variation found in prokaryotes is 
reflected in their diverse nutritional adaptations. Like all 
organisms, prokaryotes can be categorized by how they 
obtain energy and the carbon used in building the organic 
molecules that make up cells. Every type of nutrition 
observed in eukaryotes is represented among prokaryotes, 
along with some nutritional modes unique to prokaryotes. 
In fact, prokaryotes have an astounding range of metabolic 
adaptations, much broader than that found in eukaryotes.
Organisms that obtain energy from light are called pho-
totrophs, and those that obtain energy from chemicals are 
called chemotrophs. Organisms that need only CO2 or related 
compounds as a carbon source are called autotrophs. In con-
trast, heterotrophs require at least one organic nutrient, such as 
glucose, to make other organic compounds. Combining the 
two energy sources with the two carbon sources results in four 
major modes of nutrition, summarized in Table 27.1.
Table 27.1 Major Nutritional Modes
Mode
Energy 
Source
Carbon 
Source
Types of 
Organisms
AUTOTROPH
Photoautotroph Light CO2, HCO3
-,  
or related 
compound
Photosynthetic 
prokaryotes 
(for example, 
cyanobacteria); 
plants; certain 
protists (for 
example, algae)
Chemoautotroph Inorganic 
chemicals 
(such as H2S, 
NH3, or Fe2+)
CO2, HCO3
-,  
or related 
compound
Unique to cer-
tain prokaryotes 
(for example, 
Sulfolobus)
HETEROTROPH
PhotoheterotrophLight Organic 
compounds
Unique to 
certain aquatic 
and salt-loving 
prokaryotes 
(for example, 
Rhodobacter, 
Chloroflexus)
ChemoheterotrophOrganic 
compounds
Organic 
compounds
Many prokary-
otes (for exam-
ple, Clostridium) 
and protists; 
fungi; animals; 
some plants
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   635 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 637 ===

636 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
The Role of Oxygen in Metabolism
Prokaryotic metabolism also varies with respect to oxygen (O2). 
Obligate aerobes must use O2 for cellular respiration and can-
not grow without it. Obligate anaerobes, on the other hand, 
are poisoned by O2. Some obligate anaerobes live exclusively  
by fermentation; others extract chemical energy by anaerobic 
respiration, in which substances other than O2, such as 
nitrate ions (NO3
-) or sulfate ions (SO4
2-), accept electrons at 
the “downhill” end of electron transport chains. Facultative 
anaerobes use O2 if it is present but can also carry out fermen-
tation or anaerobic respiration in an anaerobic environment.
Nitrogen Metabolism
Nitrogen is essential for the production of amino acids and 
nucleic acids in all organisms. Whereas eukaryotes can obtain 
nitrogen only from a limited group of nitrogen compounds, 
prokaryotes can metabolize nitrogen in many forms. For 
example, some cyanobacteria and some methanogens (various 
archaea) convert atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3), 
a process called nitrogen fixation. The cells can then incor-
porate this “fixed” nitrogen into amino acids and other organic 
molecules. In terms of nutrition, nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria 
are some of the most self-sufficient organisms since they need 
only light, CO2, N2, water, and some minerals to grow.
Nitrogen fixation has a large impact on other organisms. For 
example, nitrogen-fixing prokaryotes can increase the nitrogen 
available to plants, which cannot use atmospheric nitrogen but 
can use the nitrogen compounds that the prokaryotes produce 
from ammonia. Concept 55.4 discusses this and other essential 
roles that prokaryotes play in the nitrogen cycles of ecosystems.
Metabolic Cooperation
Cooperation between prokaryotic cells allows them to use 
environmental resources they could not use as individual 
cells. In some cases, this cooperation takes place between 
specialized cells of a filament. For instance, the cyanobac-
terium Anabaena has genes that encode proteins for photo-
synthesis and for nitrogen fixation. However, a single cell 
cannot carry out both processes at the same time because 
photosynthesis produces O2, which inactivates the enzymes 
involved in nitrogen fixation. Instead of living as isolated 
cells, Anabaena forms filamentous chains (Figure 27.14). 
Most cells in a filament carry out only photosynthesis, while 
a few specialized cells called heterocysts (sometimes called 
heterocytes) carry out only nitrogen fixation. Each hetero-
cyst is surrounded by a thickened cell wall that restricts 
entry of O2 produced by neighboring photosynthetic cells. 
Intercellular connections allow heterocysts to transport fixed 
nitrogen to neighboring cells and to receive carbohydrates.
Metabolic cooperation among the cells of one or more 
prokaryotic species often occurs in surface-coating colonies 
known as biofilms. Cells in a biofilm secrete signaling 
20 om
HeterocystHeterocyst
Photosynthetic
cells
m Figure 27.14 Metabolic cooperation in a prokaryote. In the 
filamentous freshwater cyanobacterium Anabaena, heterocysts fix 
nitrogen, while the other cells carry out photosynthesis (LM).
molecules that recruit nearby cells, causing the colonies to 
grow. The cells also produce polysaccharides and proteins 
that stick the cells to the substrate and to one another; these 
polysaccharides and proteins form the capsule, or slime layer, 
mentioned earlier in the chapter. Channels in the biofilm 
allow nutrients to reach cells in the interior and wastes to be 
expelled.
Biofilms are common in nature, but they can cause a wide 
range of problems for humans. For example, biofilms grow-
ing in pipes slow the flow of liquids such as water or oil and 
degrade the pipes themselves. Biofilms also corrode boat 
hulls, oil platforms, and many other structures and indus-
trial products. In medical settings, biofilms can contaminate 
contact lenses, catheters, pacemakers, heart valves, artificial 
joints, and many other devices. They also contribute to tooth 
decay and a wide range of chronic infections (Figure 27.15), 
some of which can be lethal. Many biofilms can evade host 
immune responses and are extremely resistant to antibiotics, 
making them hard to treat. Altogether, each year biofilms 
cause billions of dollars in damage and inflict tens of millions 
of people with chronic infections.
5 om
. Figure 27.15 Pseudomonas aeruginosa forming a biofilm 
(colorized SEM). This widespread bacterial species can be found in 
soil and water and as part of the normal community in the human 
intestines. P. aeruginosa can cause serious infections of other human 
organs, including the skin, urinary tract, and lungs. These infections 
can be difficult to treat, in part because the bacteria can grow as 
biofilms that have increased resistance to antibiotics.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   636 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 638 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 637
by some estimates. Taking full stock of this diversity will 
require many years of research.
Another important lesson from molecular systematics 
is that horizontal gene transfer has played a key role in the 
evolution of prokaryotes. Over hundreds of millions of years, 
prokaryotes have acquired genes from even distantly related 
species, and they continue to do so today. As a result, signifi-
cant portions of the genomes of many prokaryotes are actually 
mosaics of genes imported from other species. For example, a 
study of 329 sequenced bacterial genomes found that an aver-
age of 75% of the genes in each genome had been transferred 
horizontally at some point in their evolutionary history. As we 
saw in Concept 22.6, such gene transfers can make it difficult 
to determine phylogenetic relationships. Still, it is clear that 
for billions of years, the prokaryotes have evolved in two sepa-
rate lineages, the bacteria and the archaea (see Figure 27.16).
Bacteria
Eukarya
Archaea
Bacteria
 A s  s u r v e y e d  i n  Figure 27.17, bacteria 
include the vast majority of prokaryotic 
species familiar to most people, from the 
pathogenic species that cause strep throat and tuberculosis to 
the beneficial species used to make Swiss cheese and yogurt. 
Prokaryotes have radiated into  
a diverse set of lineages
Since their origin 3.5 billion years ago, prokaryotic popula-
tions have radiated extensively as a wide range of struc-
tural and metabolic adaptations have evolved in them. 
Collectively, these adaptations have enabled prokaryotes to 
inhabit every environment known to support life—if there 
are organisms in a particular place, some of those organisms 
are prokaryotes. Yet despite their obvious success, it is only 
in recent decades that advances in genomics have begun to 
reveal the full extent of prokaryotic diversity.
An Overview of Prokaryotic Diversity
In the 1970s, microbiologists began using small-subunit ribo-
somal RNA as a marker for evolutionary relationships. Their 
results indicated that many prokaryotes once classified as 
bacteria are actually more closely related to eukaryotes and 
belong in a domain of their own: Archaea. Microbiologists 
have since analyzed larger amounts of genetic data—
including more than 1,700 entire genomes—and have con-
cluded that a few traditional groups, such as cyanobacteria, 
are monophyletic. However, other traditional groups, such 
as gram-negative bacteria, are scattered throughout several 
lineages. Figure 27.16 shows one phylogenetic hypoth-
esis for some of the major taxa of prokaryotes based on 
molecular systematics.
One lesson from studying prokaryotic phylogeny is that 
the genetic diversity of prokaryotes is immense. When 
researchers began to sequence the genes of prokaryotes, 
they could investigate only the small fraction of species that 
could be cultured in the laboratory. In the 1980s, research-
ers began using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR; see 
Figure 19.8) to analyze the genes of prokaryotes collected 
from the environment (such as from soil or water samples). 
Such “genetic prospecting” is now widely used; in fact, 
today entire prokaryotic genomes can be obtained from 
environmental samples using metagenomics (see Concept 
20.1). Each year these techniques add new branches to the 
tree of life. While only about 16,000 prokaryotic species 
worldwide have been assigned scientific names, a single 
handful of soil could contain 10,000 prokaryotic species 
CONCEPT 27.4
UNIVERSAL
ANCESTOR
Proteobacteria
Domain Bacteria Domain ArchaeaDomain
Eukarya
Chlamydias
Spirochetes
Cyanobacteria
Gram-positive
bacteria
Euryarchaeotes
Thaumarchaeotes
Aigarchaeotes
Crenarchaeotes
Korarchaeotes
Eukaryotes
TACK
. Figure 27.16 A simplified phylogeny of prokaryotes. This 
tree shows relationships among major prokaryotic groups; some of 
these relationships are shown as polytomies to reflect their uncertain 
order of divergence. Recent studies indicate that within Archaea, the 
thaumarchaeotes, aigarchaeotes, crenarchaeotes, and korarchaeotes 
are closely related; systematists have placed them in a supergroup 
called “TACK” in reference to the first letters of their names.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this phylogenetic tree diagram, which 
domain is the sister group of Archaea?
CONCEPT CHECK 27.3
1. Distinguish between the four major modes of nutrition, 
noting which are unique to prokaryotes.
2. A bacterium requires only the amino acid methionine as an 
organic nutrient and lives in lightless caves. What mode of 
nutrition does it employ? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? Describe what you might eat for a typical meal if 
humans, like cyanobacteria, could fix nitrogen.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   637 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 639 ===

638 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Chlamydias
These parasites can survive only within animal cells, 
depending on their hosts for resources as basic as ATP. The 
gram-negative walls of chlamydias are unusual in that they 
lack peptidoglycan. One species, Chlamydia trachomatis, is 
the most common cause of blindness in the world and also 
causes nongonococcal urethritis, the most common 
sexually transmitted disease in the United States.
Spirochetes
These helical gram-negative heterotrophs spiral through 
their environment by means of rotating, internal, ﬂagel-
lum-like ﬁlaments. Many spirochetes are free-living, but 
others are notorious pathogenic parasites: Treponema 
pallidum causes syphilis, and Borrelia burgdorferi causes 
Lyme disease.
Cyanobacteria
These gram-negative photoautotrophs are the only 
prokaryotes with plantlike, oxygen-generating photosyn-
thesis. (In fact, chloroplasts are thought to have evolved 
from an endosymbiotic cyanobacterium.) Both solitary 
and ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria are abundant components 
of freshwater and marine phytoplankton, the collection of  
small photosynthetic organisms that drift near the water’s 
surface. 
Gram-Positive Bacteria
Gram-positive bacteria rival the proteobacteria in diversity. 
Species in one subgroup, the actinomycetes, form colonies 
containing branched chains of cells; two of these species 
cause tuberculosis and leprosy, but most are decomposers 
living in soil. Soil-dwelling species in the genus Streptomy-
ces are cultured as a source of antibiotics, including 
tetracycline and erythromycin. Other subgroups of 
gram-positive bacteria include pathogens such as
Staphylococcus aureus (see Figure 21.14), Bacillus anthracis, 
which causes anthrax, and Clostridium botulinum, which 
causes botulism. 
This large and diverse clade of gram-negative bacteria 
includes photoautotrophs, chemoautotrophs, and hetero-
trophs. One autotroph, the sulfur bacterium Thiomargarita 
namibiensis, obtains energy by oxidizing H2S, producing 
sulfur as a waste product (the small globules in the photo-
graph below). Heterotrophs include pathogens such as 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which causes gonorrhea; Vibrio 
cholerae, which causes cholera; and Helicobacter pylori, 
which causes stomach ulcers. Current evidence indicates 
that mitochondria evolved by endosymbiosis from a 
heterotroph in the 
subgroup alpha 
proteobacteria.
This ﬁgure highlights a few key groups of bacteria, but 
their actual diversity is far greater than shown here. 
Likewise, gene sequence data indicate that the 16,000 
known species of bacteria represent a small fraction of the 
actual number, estimated at 700,000–1.4 million species.
Proteobacteria 
Chlamydia (arrows
inside an animal cell 
(colorized TEM)
2.5 om
Leptospira,
a spirochete 
(colorized TEM)
5 om40 omCylindrospermum, 
a ƂlaOentous 
cyanobacteriuOThiomargarita 
namibiensis containing 
sulfur wastes 
./
200 om
5 omStreptomyces, the 
source of many 
antibiotics (SEM)
Known species
of bacteria
(16,000)
Estimated
nuOber of
undiscovered
species of bacteria
. Figure 27.17  Exploring Bacterial Diversity
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   638 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 640 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 639
an environment that is several times saltier than seawater 
(which has a salinity of 3.5%). For example, the proteins and 
cell wall of Halobacterium have unusual features that improve 
function in extremely salty environments but render these 
organisms incapable of survival if the salinity drops below 9%.
Extreme thermophiles (from the Greek thermos, hot) 
thrive in very hot environments. For example, the archaean 
Pyrococcus furiosus lives in geothermally heated marine sedi-
ments that reach temperatures of 100°C. At temperatures 
this high, the cells of most organisms die because their DNA 
does not remain in a double helix and many of their pro-
teins denature. P. furiosus and other extreme thermophiles 
avoid this fate because they have structural and biochemical 
adaptations that make their DNA and proteins stable at high 
temperatures—a feature that has enabled P. furiosus to be used 
in biotechnology as a source of DNA polymerase for the PCR 
technique (see Figure 19.8). Other examples of extreme ther-
mophiles include archaea in the genus Sulfolobus, which live 
in sulfur-rich volcanic springs (Figure 27.18). One extreme 
thermophile that lives near deep-sea hot springs called hydro-
thermal vents is informally known as “strain 121” since it can 
reproduce even at 121°C.
Many other archaea live in more moderate environments. 
Consider methanogens, archaea that release methane as a 
by-product of how they obtain energy. Many methanogens 
use CO2 to oxidize H2, a process that produces both energy 
and methane waste. Among the strictest of anaerobes, 
methanogens are poisoned by O2. Although some methano-
gens live in extreme environments, such as under kilome-
ters of ice in Greenland, others live in swamps and marshes 
where other microorganisms have consumed all the O2. The 
“marsh gas” found in such environments is the methane 
released by these archaea. Other species inhabit the anaero-
bic guts of cattle, termites, and other herbivores, playing an 
essential role in the nutrition of these animals. Methanogens 
Every major mode of nutrition and metabolism is represented 
among the 80 or so phyla of bacteria, and even a small group 
of bacteria may contain species exhibiting many different 
nutritional modes. As we’ll see, the diverse nutritional and 
metabolic capabilities of bacteria—and archaea—are behind 
the great impact these organisms have on Earth and its life.
Archaea
Archaea share certain traits with bacteria and 
other traits with eukaryotes (Table 27.2). 
However, archaea also have many unique 
characteristics, as we would expect in a taxon that has followed 
a separate evolutionary path for so long.
The first prokaryotes assigned to domain Archaea live in 
environments so extreme that few other organisms can survive 
there. Such organisms are called extremophiles, meaning 
“lovers” of extreme conditions (from the Greek philos, lover), 
and include extreme halophiles and extreme thermophiles.
Extreme halophiles (from the Greek halo, salt) live in  
highly saline environments, such as the Great Salt Lake in Utah, 
the Dead Sea in Israel, and the Spanish lake shown in Figure 
27.1. Some species merely tolerate salinity, while others require 
Table 27.2  A Comparison of the Three Domains of Life
CHARACTERISTIC
DOMAIN
Bacteria Archaea Eukarya
Nuclear envelope Absent Absent Present
Membrane-
enclosed 
organelles
Absent Absent Present
Peptidoglycan in 
cell wall
Present Absent Absent
Membrane lipids Unbranched 
hydrocarbons
Some 
branched 
hydrocarbons
Unbranched 
hydrocarbons
RNA polymerase One kind Several kinds Several kinds
Initiator amino 
acid for protein 
synthesis
Formyl-
methionine
Methionine Methionine
Introns in genes Very rare Present in 
some genes
Present in 
many genes
Response to 
the antibiotics 
streptomycin and 
chloramphenicol
Growth 
 usually 
inhibited
Growth not 
inhibited
Growth not 
inhibited
Histones associ-
ated with DNA
Absent Present in 
some species
Present
Circular 
chromosome
Present Present Absent
Growth at 
temperatures 
7 100°C
No Some species No
m Figure 27.18 Extreme thermophiles. Orange and yellow 
colonies of thermophilic prokaryotes grow in the hot water of 
Yellowstone National Park’s Grand Prismatic Spring.
MAKE CONNECTIONS How might the enzymes of thermophiles 
differ from those of other organisms? (Review enzymes in Concept 6.4.)
Eukarya
Archaea
Bacteria
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   639 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 641 ===

640 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
important to the biosphere that if they were to disappear, the 
prospects of survival for many other species would be dim.
Chemical Recycling
The atoms that make up the organic molecules in all living 
things were at one time part of inorganic substances in the 
soil, air, and water. Sooner or later, those atoms will return 
to the nonliving environment. Ecosystems depend on the 
continual recycling of chemical elements between the living 
and nonliving components of the environment, and pro-
karyotes play a major role in this process. For example, some 
chemoheterotrophic prokaryotes function as decomposers, 
breaking down dead organisms as well as waste products and 
thereby unlocking supplies of carbon, nitrogen, and other ele-
ments. Without the actions of prokaryotes and other decom-
posers such as fungi, life as we know it would cease. (See 
Concept 55.4 for a detailed discussion of chemical cycles.)
Prokaryotes also convert some molecules to forms that can 
be taken up by other organisms. Cyanobacteria and other 
autotrophic prokaryotes use CO2 to make organic compounds 
such as sugars, which are then passed up through food chains. 
Cyanobacteria also produce atmospheric O2, and a variety 
of prokaryotes fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into forms that 
other organisms can use to make the building blocks of pro-
teins and nucleic acids. Under some conditions, prokaryotes 
can increase the availability of nutrients that plants require 
for growth, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
(Figure 27.19). Prokaryotes can also decrease the availability 
of key plant nutrients; this occurs when prokaryotes “immo-
bilize” nutrients by using them to synthesize molecules 
are also useful to humans as decomposers in sewage treat-
ment facilities.
Many extreme halophiles and most known methanogens 
are archaea in the clade Euryarchaeota (from the Greek 
eurys, broad, a reference to their wide habitat range). The 
euryarchaeotes also include some extreme thermophiles, 
though most thermophilic species belong to a second clade, 
Crenarchaeota (cren means “spring,” such as a hydrothermal 
spring). Metagenomic studies have identified many species 
of euryarchaeotes and crenarchaeotes that are not extremo-
philes. These archaea exist in habitats ranging from farm 
soils to lake sediments to the surface of the open ocean.
New findings continue to inform our understanding of 
archaeal phylogeny. For example, recent metagenomic stud-
ies have uncovered the genomes of many species that are 
not members of Euryarchaeota or Crenarchaeota. Moreover, 
phylogenomic analyses show that three of these newly dis-
covered groups—the Thaumarchaeota, Aigarchaeota, and 
Korarchaeota—are more closely related to the Crenarchaeota 
than they are to the Euryarchaeota. These findings have 
led to the identification of a “supergroup” that contains 
the Thaumarchaeota, Aigarchaeota, Crenarchaeota, and 
Korarchaeota (see Figure 27.16). This supergroup is referred 
to as “TACK” based on the names of the groups it includes. 
The importance of the TACK supergroup was highlighted 
by the recent discovery of the lokiarchaeotes, a group that is 
closely related to TACK archaea and that may represent the 
long-sought-after sister group of the eukaryotes. As such, 
the characteristics of lokiarchaeotes may shed light on one 
of the major puzzles of biology today—how eukaryotes 
arose from their prokaryotic ancestors. The pace of these 
and other recent discoveries suggests that as metagenomic 
prospecting continues, the tree in Figure 27.16 will likely 
undergo further changes.
CONCEPT CHECK 27.4
1. Explain how molecular systematics and metagenomics have 
contributed to our understanding of the phylogeny and 
evolution of prokaryotes.
2. DRAW IT Redraw Figure 27.16 assuming that eukaryotes are 
more closely related to TACK archaea than to euryarchaeotes. 
Under this assumption, would the three domains shown in 
Figure 27.16 be valid? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 27.5
Prokaryotes play crucial roles  
in the biosphere
If people were to disappear from the planet tomorrow,  
life on Earth would change for many species, but few would 
be driven to extinction. In contrast, prokaryotes are so 
Uptake of K+ by plants (mg)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
No
bacteria
Strain 3
Seedlings grow-
ing in the lab
Strain 2Strain 1
Soil treatment
. Figure 27.19 Impact of bacteria on soil nutrient 
availability. Pine seedlings grown in sterile soils to which one of 
three strains of the bacterium Burkholderia glathei had been added 
absorbed more potassium (K+) than did seedlings grown in soil 
without any bacteria. Other results (not shown) demonstrated that 
strain 3 increased the amount of K+ released  
from mineral crystals to the soil.
WHAT IF? Estimate the average uptake of K+ for seedlings in soils with 
bacteria. What would you expect this average to be if bacteria had no 
effect on nutrient availability?
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   640 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 642 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 641
mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism in greater detail 
in Concept 54.1.)
The very existence of an ecosystem can depend on prokary-
otes. For example, consider the diverse ecological communities 
found at hydrothermal vents. These communities are densely 
populated by many different kinds of animals, including 
worms, clams, crabs, and fishes. But since sunlight does not 
penetrate to the deep ocean floor, the community does not 
include photosynthetic organisms. Instead, the energy that 
supports the community is derived from the metabolic activi-
ties of chemoautotrophic bacteria. These bacteria harvest chem-
ical energy from compounds such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) 
that are released from the vent. An active hydrothermal vent 
may support hundreds of eukaryotic species, but when the vent 
stops releasing chemicals, the chemoautotrophic bacteria can-
not survive. As a result, the entire vent community collapses.
that remain within their cells. Thus, prokaryotes can have 
complex effects on soil nutrient concentrations. In marine 
environments, an archaean from the clade Crenarchaeota 
can perform nitrification, a key step in the nitrogen cycle (see 
Figure 55.14). Crenarchaeotes dominate the oceans by num-
bers, comprising an estimated 1028 cells. The sheer abundance 
of these organisms suggests that they may have a large impact 
on the global nitrogen cycle.
Ecological Interactions
Prokaryotes play a central role in many ecological interac-
tions. Consider symbiosis (from a Greek word meaning 
“living together”), an ecological relationship in which two 
species live in close contact with each other. Prokaryotes 
often form symbiotic associations with much larger organ-
isms. In general, the larger organism in a symbiotic relation-
ship is known as the host, and the smaller is known as the 
symbiont. There are many cases in which a prokaryote and 
its host participate in mutualism, an ecological interaction 
between two species in which both benefit (Figure 27.20). 
Other interactions take the form of commensalism, an 
ecological relationship in which one species benefits while 
the other is not harmed or helped in any significant way. For 
example, more than 150 bacterial species live on the outer 
surface of your body, covering portions of your skin with 
up to 10 million cells per square centimeter. Some of these 
species are commensalists: You provide them with food, 
such as the oils that exude from your pores, and a place to 
live, while they neither harm nor benefit you. Finally, some 
symbiotic prokaryotes engage in parasitism, an ecological 
relationship in which a parasite feeds on the cell contents, 
tissues, or body fluids of its host. As a group, parasites harm 
but usually do not kill their host, at least not immediately 
(unlike a predator). Parasites that cause disease are known as 
pathogens, many of which are prokaryotic. (We’ll discuss 
. Figure 27.20 Mutualism: bacterial “headlights.” The 
glowing oval below the eye of the flashlight fish (Photoblepharon 
palpebratus) is an organ harboring bioluminescent bacteria. 
The fish uses the light to attract prey and to signal potential mates. 
The bacteria receive nutrients from the fish.
CONCEPT CHECK 27.5
1. Explain how prokaryotes, though small, can be considered 
giants in their collective impact on Earth and its life.
2. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 11.5. Then summarize 
the main steps by which cyanobacteria produce O2 and use 
CO2 to make organic compounds.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 27.6
Prokaryotes have both beneficial 
and harmful impacts on humans
Although the best-known prokaryotes tend to be the bacteria 
that cause human illness, these pathogens represent only a 
small fraction of prokaryotic species. Many other prokaryotes 
have positive interactions with people, and some play essen-
tial roles in agriculture and industry.
Mutualistic Bacteria
As is true for many other eukaryotes, human well-being can 
depend on mutualistic prokaryotes. For example, our intes-
tines are home to an estimated 500–1,000 species of bacteria; 
collectively, their cells outnumber all human cells in the body 
by a factor of ten. Different species live in different portions 
of the intestines, and they vary in their ability to process dif-
ferent foods. Many of these species are mutualists, digesting 
food that our own intestines cannot break down. The genome 
of one of these gut mutualists, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 
includes a large array of genes involved in synthesizing  
carbohydrates, vitamins, and other nutrients needed by 
  M a s t e r i n g  B i o l o g y  Interview with Penny 
Chisholm: Studying the role of cyanobacteria  
in marine ecosystems
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   641 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 643 ===

642 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
seafood, and vegetables. Like other exotoxins, the botu-
linum toxin can produce disease even if the bacteria that 
manufacture it are no longer present when the food is eaten.
Endotoxins are lipopolysaccharide components of the 
outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. In contrast to 
exotoxins, endotoxins are released only when the bacteria 
die and their cell walls break down. Endotoxin-producing 
bacteria include species in the genus Salmonella, such as 
Salmonella typhi, which causes typhoid fever. You might 
have heard of food poisoning caused by other Salmonella 
species that can be found in poultry and some fruits 
and vegetables.
Finally, horizontal gene transfer can spread genes associ-
ated with virulence, turning normally harmless bacteria 
into potent pathogens. E. coli, for instance, is ordinarily a 
harmless symbiont in the human intestines, but pathogenic 
strains that cause bloody diarrhea have emerged. One of 
the most dangerous strains, O157:H7, is a global threat; in 
the United States alone, there are around 75,000 cases of 
O157:H7 infection per year, often from contaminated beef 
or produce. Scientists have discovered over 1,000 genes in 
O157:H7 that have no counterpart in harmless E. coli strains. 
Some of the genes found only in O157:H7 are associated with 
virulence and were likely transferred by phage-mediated 
horizontal gene transfer (transduction) from pathogenic 
bacterial species.
Antibiotic Resistance
Since their initial use in the 1940s, antibiotics have saved 
many lives and reduced the incidence of disease caused by 
pathogenic bacteria. Unfortunately, as Figure 27.22 shows, 
humans. Signals from the bacterium activate human genes 
that build the network of intestinal blood vessels neces-
sary to absorb nutrient molecules. Other signals induce 
human cells to produce antimicrobial compounds to which 
B. thetaiotaomicron is not susceptible. This action may reduce 
the population sizes of other, competing species, thus poten-
tially benefiting both B. thetaiotaomicron and its human host.
Pathogenic Bacteria
All the pathogenic prokaryotes known to date are bacteria, 
and they deserve their negative reputation. Bacteria cause 
about half of all human diseases. For example, more than 
1.5 million people die each year of the lung disease tuber-
culosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. And another 
2 million people die each year from diarrheal diseases 
caused by various bacteria.
Some bacterial diseases are transmitted by other species, 
such as fleas or ticks. In the United States, the most wide-
spread pest-carried disease is Lyme disease, which infects 
about 300,000 people each year according to a recent CDC 
estimate (Figure 27.21). Caused by a bacterium carried by 
ticks, Lyme disease can result in debilitating arthritis, heart 
disease, nervous disorders, and death if untreated.
Pathogenic prokaryotes usually cause illness by produc-
ing poisons, which are classified as exotoxins or endotoxins. 
Exotoxins are proteins secreted by certain bacteria and 
other organisms. Cholera, a dangerous diarrheal disease, 
is caused by an exotoxin secreted by the proteobacterium 
Vibrio cholerae. The exotoxin stimulates intestinal cells to 
release chloride ions into the gut, and water follows by 
osmosis. In another example, the potentially fatal disease 
botulism is caused by botulinum toxin, an exotoxin secreted 
by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium botulinum as it 
ferments various foods, including improperly canned meat, 
5 om
m Figure 27.21 Lyme disease. Ticks in the genus Ixodes spread the 
disease by transmitting the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi (colorized 
SEM). A rash may develop at the site of the tick’s bite; the rash may 
be large and ring-shaped (as shown) or much less distinctive.
Ceftaroline
Daptomycin
Linezolid
Imipenem
Vancomycin
Methicillin
Colistin
Erythromycin
Tetracycline
Penicillin
1930 1950 1970 1990 2010
Year
Antibiotic:Antibiotic discovered
Medical usage begins
Resistance observed
. Figure 27.22 The rise of antibiotic resistance. As illustrated 
by the examples shown here, bacteria have developed resistance to 
every antibiotic currently in clinical use, often within a few years. It 
took more than 50 years for resistance to develop to colistin, most 
likely because this antibiotic has toxic side effects in humans and 
hence was used rarely (as a treatment of last resort).
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, identify the antibiotic for which 
resistance appeared before the antibiotic began to be used medicinally.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   642 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 644 ===

 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 643
resistance to antibiotics has evolved in many bacteria,  
often rapidly. Compounding this problem, the discovery 
of new antibiotics has not kept pace with the rate at which 
resistance has evolved in bacteria. We now face a major 
public health concern: For every antibiotic now in  
use, at least one species of bacteria has developed  
resistance to it.
The rise of antibiotic resistance is driven by several fac-
tors. The rapid reproduction of bacteria enables cells car-
rying resistance genes to quickly produce large numbers of 
resistant offspring. Thus, when humans use antibiotics in 
medical or agricultural settings, natural selection can cause 
the fraction of a bacterial population carrying genes for 
antibiotic resistance to increase rapidly. Resistance genes 
also can spread within and among bacterial species by hori-
zontal gene transfer. As a result, bacterial strains that are 
resistant to multiple antibiotics are becoming more com-
mon, making the treatment of certain bacterial infections 
very difficult.
Consider tuberculosis, the leading cause of death by 
 i n f e c t i o u s  d i s e a s e  w o r l d w i d e .  T h e  r e c e n t  r i s e  o f  d r u g - 
resistant strains of the tuberculosis bacterium (Mycobacterium  
tuberculosis) threatens decades of progress in combating 
tuberculosis. “Superbug” tuberculosis strains came to public 
notice in 2006, when an outbreak in a rural area of South 
Africa killed 52 of the 53 patients infected with what is now 
called extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB). 
As of 2017, more than 100 countries had confirmed cases 
of XDR-TB. There are few treatments for XDR-TB, and 
those we have are difficult to administer and more toxic 
than are treatments for standard strains of the tuberculosis 
bacterium.
M. tuberculosis is not the only bacterium in which resis-
tance to multiple antibiotics has evolved. Highly resis-
tant strains have also been found in species that cause 
potentially lethal infections of the skin, lungs, digestive 
tract, and other human organs. Even so, recent discover-
ies give cause for hope. In 2018, for example, researchers 
used a metagenomic approach to sequence genes from 
soil bacteria that could not be grown in the laboratory. 
They found that some of these genes encoded a new 
class of antibiotics, which have been named malacidins. 
Malacidins have been effective against multidrug-resistant 
gram-positive pathogens, including clone USA300 
(Figure 27.23), a highly virulent strain of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA; see Figure 21.14). 
Also in 2018, other researchers developed virus-like par-
ticles capable of targeting (and killing) particular species 
of multidrug-resistant bacteria. In recent years, novel 
approaches for growing soil bacteria in the laboratory also 
have led to the discovery of new antibiotics, as you can 
explore in the Scientific Skills Exercise.
Prokaryotes in Research and Technology
On a positive note, we reap many benefits from the metabolic 
capabilities of both bacteria and archaea. For example, people 
have long used bacteria to convert milk to cheese and yogurt. 
Bacteria are also used in the production of beer and wine, pep-
peroni, fermented cabbage (sauerkraut), and soy sauce. In recent 
decades, our greater understanding of prokaryotes has led to 
an explosion of new applications in  biotechnology. Examples 
include the use of E. coli in gene cloning (see Figure 19.4) and 
the use of DNA polymerase from Pyrococcus furiosus in the PCR 
technique (see Figure 19.8). Through genetic engineering, we 
can modify bacteria to produce vitamins, antibiotics, hormones, 
and other products (see Concept 19.1).
Recently, the prokaryotic CRISPR-Cas system, which helps 
bacteria and archaea defend against attack by viruses (see 
Figure 26.7), has been developed into a powerful new tool 
for altering genes in virtually any organism. The genomes of 
many prokaryotes contain short DNA repeats, called CRISPRs, 
that interact with proteins known as the Cas (CRISPR-
associated) proteins. Cas proteins, acting together with 
“guide RNA” made from the CRISPR region, can cut any DNA 
sequence to which they are directed. Scientists have been able 
to exploit this system by introducing a Cas protein (Cas9) 
to guide RNA into cells whose DNA they want to alter (see 
Figure 17.28). Among other applications, this CRISPR-Cas9 
system has already opened new lines of research on HIV, the 
virus that causes AIDS (Figure 27.24). While the CRISPR-Cas9 
system can potentially be used in many different ways, care 
must be taken to guard against the unintended consequences 
that could arise when applying such a new and powerful 
technology.
Another valuable application of bacteria is to reduce our 
use of petroleum. Consider the plastics industry. Globally, 
8
4
6
2
0
0 24 48 72
Time (hours)
MRSA abundance 
(log scale)
Control (no antibiotics)
Treatment with malacidin
. Figure 27.23 Effectiveness of malacidin against MRSA 
clone USA300. Treatment with malacidin rapidly cleared a skin 
infection in rats caused by clone USA300, a highly virulent strain 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Malacidin 
was as effective as daptomycin, an antibiotic used to treat life-
threatening infections.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   643 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 645 ===

644 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Can Antibiotics Obtained from Soil Bacteria Help Fight 
Drug-Resistant Bacteria? Soil bacteria synthesize antibiot-
ics, which they use against species that attack or compete with 
them. To date, these species have been inaccessible as sources 
for new medicines because 99% of soil bacteria cannot be grown 
using standard laboratory techniques. To address this problem, 
researchers developed a method in which soil bacteria grow in 
a simulated version of their natural environment; this led to the 
discovery of a new antibiotic, teixobactin. In this exercise, you’ll 
calculate means and standard errors from an experiment that 
tested teixobactin’s effectiveness against MRSA (methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus; see Figure 21.14).
How the Experiment Was Done Researchers drilled tiny holes 
into a small plastic chip and filled the holes with a dilute aqueous 
solution containing soil bacteria and agar. The dilution had been 
calibrated so that only one bacterium was likely to grow in each 
hole. After the agar solidified, the chip was placed in a container 
containing the original soil; nutrients and other essential materials 
from the soil diffused into the agar, allowing the bacteria to grow.
After isolating teixobactin from a soil bacterium, researchers 
performed the following experiment: Mice infected with MRSA 
were given low (1 mg/kg) or high (5 mg/kg) doses of teixobac-
tin or vancomycin, an existing antibiotic; in the control, mice 
infected with MRSA were not given an antibiotic. After 26 hours, 
researchers sampled infected mice and estimated the number of 
S. aureus colonies in each sample. Results were reported on a log 
scale; note that a decrease of 1.0 on this scale reflects a tenfold 
decrease in MRSA abundance.
Data from the Experiment
Treatment Dose (mg/kg)
Log of Number 
of Colonies Mean ( x)
Control — 9.0, 9.5, 9.0, 8.9
Vancomycin 1.0 8.5, 8.4, 8.2
5.0 5.3, 5.9, 4.7
Teixobactin 1.0 8.5, 6.0, 8.4, 6.0
5.0 3.8, 4.9, 5.2, 4.9
Calculating and Interpreting Means and Standard Errors
Data from L. Ling et al. A new antibiotic kills pathogens without detectable 
 resistance, Nature 517:455–459 (2015).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. The mean (x) of a variable is the sum of the data values 
divided by the number of observations (n):
x=axi
n
In this formula, xi is the value of the ith observation of the 
variable (observation number “i” out of a total of n such obser-
vations); the g symbol indicates that the n values of x are to be 
added together. Calculate the mean for each treatment.
2. Use your results from question 1 to evaluate the effectiveness of 
vancomycin and teixobactin.
3. The variation found in a set of data can be estimated by the 
standard deviation, s:
s=A
a(xi-x)2
n-1
Calculate the standard deviation for each treatment.
4. The standard error (SE), which indicates how greatly the mean 
would likely vary if the experiment was repeated, is calculated as:
SE=s
2n
 As a rough rule of thumb, if an experiment were to be repeated, 
the new mean typically would lie within two standard errors of 
the original mean (that is, within the range x{2SE). Calculate 
x{2SE for each treatment, determine whether these ranges 
overlap, and interpret your results.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
c Plastic chip used to 
grow soil bacteria
each year more than 750 billion pounds of plastic are pro-
duced from petroleum and used to make toys, storage contain-
ers, soft drink bottles, and many other items. Many of these 
products end up as plastic waste that contaminates natural 
habitats and degrades slowly, creating environmental prob-
lems (see Concept 56.4). One promising avenue for addressing 
these problems is to use bacteria that produce natural plastics 
(Figure 27.25). For example, some bacteria synthesize a type 
of polymer known as PHA (polyhydroxyalkanoate), which 
they use to store chemical energy. The PHA can be extracted, 
formed into pellets, and used to make durable, yet biodegrad-
able, plastics. Researchers are also seeking to reduce the use of 
petroleum and other fossil fuels by engineering bacteria that 
can produce ethanol from various forms of biomass, including 
agricultural waste, switchgrass, and corn.
Another way to harness prokaryotes is bioremediation, 
the use of organisms to remove pollutants from soil, air, or 
(a)Control cells. The green color 
indicates infection by HIV.
(b)Experimental cells. These cells 
were treated with a CRISPR-Cas9 
system that targets HIV.
. Figure 27.24 CRISPR: opening new avenues of research for 
treating HIV infection. (a) In laboratory experiments, untreated 
(control) human cells were susceptible to infection by HIV, the virus that 
causes AIDS. (b) In contrast, cells treated with a CRISPR-Cas9 system  
that targets HIV were resistant to viral infection. The CRISPR-Cas9 
system was also able to remove HIV proviruses (see Figure 26.8) that 
had become incorporated into the DNA of human cells.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   644 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 646 ===

water. For example, anaerobic bacteria and archaea decom-
pose the organic matter in sewage, converting it to material 
that can be used as landfill or fertilizer after chemical steriliza-
tion. Other bioremediation applications include cleaning up 
oil spills (Figure 27.26) and precipitating radioactive material 
(such as uranium) out of groundwater.
The usefulness of prokaryotes largely derives from their 
diverse forms of nutrition and metabolism. All this metabolic 
versatility evolved prior to the appearance of the structural 
novelties that heralded the evolution of eukaryotic organ-
isms, discussed in the rest of this unit.
CONCEPT CHECK 27.6
1. Identify at least two ways that prokaryotes have affected 
you positively today.
2. A pathogenic bacterium’s toxin causes symptoms that 
increase the bacterium’s chance of spreading from host to 
host. Does this information indicate whether the poison is 
an exotoxin or endotoxin? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? How might a sudden and dramatic change in your 
diet affect the diversity of prokaryotic species that live in your 
digestive tract?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
b Figure 27.25  
Bacteria synthesizing 
and storing PHA, 
a component of 
biodegradable 
plastics.
c Figure 27.26  
Bioremediation 
of an oil spill. 
Spraying fertilizer 
stimulates the growth 
of native bacteria 
that metabolize oil, 
increasing the speed 
of the breakdown 
process up to fivefold.
27 Chapter Review   G o  t o  Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
• Many prokaryotic species can reproduce quickly by binary 
fission, leading to the formation of extremely large populations.
? Describe features of prokaryotes that enable them to thrive in a wide 
range of different environments.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 27.1
Structural and functional adaptations contribute  
to prokaryotic success (pp. 628–632)
Cell wall: found in nearly all
prokaryotes; structure differs 
in gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria
Capsule: sticky layer of 
polysaccharide or protein 
that can help cell 
adherence and/or evasion 
of a host’s immune system
Internal organization: no 
nucleus or other membrane-
enclosed organelles; usually no 
complex compartmentalization
Flagella: structures used by most 
motile bacteria for propulsion; 
many species can move toward 
or away from certain stimuli
Circular chromosome: 
often accompanied 
by smaller rings of 
DNA called plasmids
Fimbriae: 
hairlike 
appendages 
that help cells 
adhere to 
other cells or 
to a substrate
Pilus:  
appendage
that facilitates 
conjugation
CONCEPT 27.2
Rapid reproduction, mutation, and genetic 
recombination promote genetic diversity  
in prokaryotes (pp. 632–635)
• Because prokaryotes can often proliferate rapidly, mutations can 
quickly increase a population’s genetic variation. As a result, pro-
karyotic populations often can evolve in short periods of time in 
response to changing conditions.
• Genetic diversity in prokaryotes also can arise by recombina-
tion of the DNA from two different cells (via transformation, 
transduction, or conjugation). By transferring advantageous 
alleles, such as ones for antibiotic resistance, recombination can 
promote adaptive evolution in prokaryotic populations.
? Mutations are rare and prokaryotes reproduce asexually, yet their 
populations can have high genetic diversity. Explain how this can occur.
CONCEPT 27.3
Diverse nutritional and metabolic adaptations have 
evolved in prokaryotes (pp. 635–637)
• Nutritional diversity is much greater in prokaryotes than in eukary-
otes and includes all four modes of nutrition: photoautotrophy, 
chemoautotrophy, photoheterotrophy, and chemoheterotrophy.
• Among prokaryotes, obligate aerobes require O2, obligate 
anaerobes are poisoned by O2, and facultative anaerobes can 
survive with or without O2.
 CHAPTER 27  Prokaryotes 645
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   645 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 647 ===

646 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
• Unlike eukaryotes, prokaryotes can metabolize nitrogen in many 
different forms. Some can convert atmospheric nitrogen to am-
monia, a process called nitrogen fixation.
• Prokaryotic cells and even species may cooperate metabolically, 
including in surface-coating biofilms.
? Describe the range of prokaryotic metabolic adaptations.
CONCEPT 27.4
Prokaryotes have radiated into a diverse set  
of lineages (pp. 637–640)
• Molecular systematics is helping biologists classify prokaryotes 
and identify new clades.
• Diverse nutritional types are scattered among the major groups  
of bacteria. The two largest groups are proteobacteria and gram-
positive bacteria.
• Some archaea, such as extreme thermophiles and extreme 
halophiles, live in extreme environments. Other archaea live in 
moderate environments such as soils and lakes.
? How have molecular data informed prokaryotic phylogeny?
CONCEPT 27.5
Prokaryotes play crucial roles in the biosphere  
(pp. 640–641)
• Decomposition by heterotrophic prokaryotes and the synthetic 
activities of autotrophic and nitrogen-fixing prokaryotes contrib-
ute to the recycling of elements in ecosystems.
• Many prokaryotes have a symbiotic relationship with a host; 
the relationships between prokaryotes and their hosts range from 
mutualism to commensalism to parasitism.
? In what ways are prokaryotes key to the survival of many species?
CONCEPT 27.6
Prokaryotes have both beneficial and harmful impacts 
on humans (pp. 641–645)
• People depend on mutualistic prokaryotes, including hundreds of 
species that live in our intestines and help digest food.
• Pathogenic bacteria typically cause disease by releasing 
exotoxins or endotoxins. Horizontal gene transfer can spread 
genes associated with virulence to harmless species or strains.
• Resistance to multiple antibiotics has evolved in many patho-
genic bacteria, a problem of great concern for public health.
• Prokaryotes can be used in bioremediation and production of 
plastics, vitamins, antibiotics, and other products.
? Describe beneficial and harmful impacts of prokaryotes on humans.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION In patients with nonresistant 
strains of the tuberculosis bacterium, antibiotics can relieve 
symptoms in a few weeks. However, it takes much longer to halt 
the infection, and patients may discontinue treatment while 
bacteria are still present. Explain how this could result in the 
evolution of drug-resistant pathogens.
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • INTERPRET THE DATA The 
nitrogen-fixing bacterium Rhizobium infects the roots of some 
plant species, forming a mutualism in which the bacterium 
provides nitrogen, and the plant provides carbohydrates. 
Scientists measured the 12-week growth of one such plant 
species (Acacia irrorata) when infected by six different Rhizobium 
strains. (a) Graph the data. (b) Interpret the graph.
Rhizobium strain 1 2 3 4 5 6
Plant mass (g) 0.91 0.06 1.56 1.72 0.14 1.03
Data from J. J. Burdon et al., Variation in the effectiveness of symbiotic 
associations between native rhizobia and temperate Australian Acacia: 
within species interactions, Journal of Applied Ecology 36:398–408 (1999).
Note: Without Rhizobium, after 12 weeks, Acacia plants have a mass  
of about 0.1 g.
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ENERGY In a short essay (about 
100–150 words), discuss how prokaryotes and other members of 
hydrothermal vent communities transfer and transform energy.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Explain how the small size and rapid reproduction rate of bacteria 
(such as the population shown here on the tip of a pin) contribute 
to their large population sizes and high genetic variation.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–6 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C27_PRF.indd   646 3/21/20   2:19 AM

=== SIDE 648 ===

647
Figure 28.1 Knowing that prokaryotes are extremely small, you might assume that 
this image shows six prokaryotes and one much larger eukaryote. But in fact, the only 
prokaryote is the organism immediately above the scale bar—the rest are members 
of diverse, mostly unicellular groups of eukaryotes informally known as protists.
The Origin and Evolution  
of Eukaryotes28
What gave rise to the great diversity of protists, 
and how have their lineages diverged over time?
Much of protistan diversity can be traced to endosymbiosis:
Mitochondrion
Excavata
SAR
Archaeplastida
Unikonta
Plastid
Over time, early heterotrophic and 
photosynthetic eukaryotes have given
rise to four highly diverse supergroups 
of eukaryotes:
Engulfed
photosynthetic
bacterium
Engulfed aerobic
bacterium
Early eukaryote 
(a heterotroph)
Ancestral
cell
Early photosynthetic
eukaryote
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 28
• Animation: Life Cycle of a Malaria Parasite
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Interpreting 
Comparisons of Genetic Sequences
• Misconception Questions
Study Tip
Label a drawing: Protist life cycles vary 
greatly. To make sense of this variation, 
it can be helpful to identify when mitosis 
occurs in different life cycles, as shown 
here for a portion of Figure 28.14. Identify 
the stages at which mitosis occurs in 
Figures!28.14, 28.18, 28.25, and 28.28.
28.1 Most eukaryotes are single-celled 
organisms p. 648
28.2 Excavates include protists with 
modified mitochondria and protists 
with unique flagella p. 651
28.3 SAR is a highly diverse group 
of protists defined by DNA 
similarities p. 655
28.4 Red algae and green algae are the 
closest relatives of plants p. 663
28.5 Unikonts include protists that 
are closely related to fungi and 
animals p. 665
28.6 Protists play key roles in ecological 
communities p. 668
KEY CONCEPTS
Female
gametophyte
Zoospore
Mitosis
Mitosis
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   647 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 649 ===

648 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
For example, most protists are unicellular, although there 
are some colonial and multicellular species. Single-celled 
protists are justifiably considered the simplest eukaryotes, 
but at the cellular level, many protists are very complex—
the most elaborate of all cells. In multicellular organisms, 
essential biological functions are carried out by organs. 
Unicellular protists carry out the same essential functions, 
but they do so using subcellular organelles, not multicellu-
lar organs. The organelles that protists use are mostly those 
discussed in Figure 7.8, including the nucleus, endoplasmic 
reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes. Certain protists 
also rely on organelles not found in most other eukaryotic 
cells, such as contractile vacuoles that pump excess water 
from the protistan cell (see Figure 8.13). One group of dino-
flagellate protists has the most complex subcellular structure 
known: a unique, eye-like organelle called an ocelloid with 
components resembling the lens and retina in the eyes of 
vertebrates and some other animals (Figure 28.2).
Protists are also very diverse in their nutrition. Some 
protists are photoautotrophs and contain chloroplasts. Some 
are heterotrophs, absorbing organic molecules or ingesting 
larger food particles. Still other protists, called mixotrophs, 
combine photosynthesis and heterotrophic nutrition. 
Photoautotrophy, heterotrophy, and mixotrophy have all 
arisen independently in many different protist lineages.
Reproduction and life cycles also are highly varied among 
protists. Some protists are only known to reproduce asexu-
ally; others can also reproduce sexually or at least employ the 
sexual processes of meiosis and fertilization. All three basic 
types of sexual life cycles (see Figure 13.6) are represented 
among protists, along with some variations that do not quite 
fit any of these types. We will examine the life cycles of sev-
eral protist groups later in this chapter.
Endosymbiosis in Eukaryotic Evolution
What gave rise to the enormous diversity of protists that exist 
today? There is abundant evidence that much of protistan 
diversity has its origins in endosymbiosis, a relationship 
Most eukaryotes are single-
celled organisms
Protists—along with plants, animals, and fungi—are eukary-
otes; they are in domain Eukarya, one of the three domains 
of life. Genetic and morphological studies have shown that 
some protists are more closely related to plants, fungi, or ani-
mals than they are to other protists. As a result, the kingdom 
in which all protists once were classified, Protista, has been 
abandoned, and various protist lineages are now recognized 
as major groups in their own right. Most biologists still use 
the term protist, but only as a convenient way to refer to 
eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, or fungi.
Unlike the cells of prokaryotes, the cells of protists and 
other eukaryotes have a nucleus and other membrane-
enclosed organelles, such as mitochondria and the Golgi 
apparatus. Such organelles provide specific locations where 
particular cellular functions are accomplished, making the 
structure and organization of eukaryotic cells more complex 
than those of prokaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells also have a 
well-developed cytoskeleton that extends throughout the 
cell (see Figure 7.20). The cytoskeleton provides the struc-
tural support that enables eukaryotic cells to have asym-
metric (irregular) forms, as well as to change in shape as 
they feed, move, or grow. In contrast, prokaryotic cells lack 
a well-developed cytoskeleton, thus limiting the extent to 
which they can maintain asymmetric forms or change shape 
over time.
We’ll survey the diversity of eukaryotes throughout the 
rest of this unit, beginning in this chapter with the protists. 
As you explore this material, bear in mind that
• t h e  o r g a n i s m s  i n  m o s t  e u k a r y o t i c  l i n e a g e s  a r e  p r o t i s t s ,  a n d
• most protists are unicellular.
Thus, life differs greatly from how most of us commonly 
think of it. The large, multicellular organisms that we know 
best (plants, animals, and fungi) are the tips of just a few 
branches on the great tree of life (see Figure 22.21).
CONCEPT 28.1
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Seeing the 
Invisible: Van Leeuwenhoek’s First Glimpses of  
the Microbial World 
Structural and Functional Diversity  
in Protists
Given that they are classified in a number of different 
groups, it isn’t surprising that few general characteristics 
of protists can be cited without exceptions. In fact, pro-
tists exhibit more structural and functional diversity than 
the eukaryotes with which we are most familiar—plants, 
animals, and fungi.
“Lens”
“Retina”
c Figure 28.2 The 
eye-like ocelloid of 
Erythropsidinium, a 
dinoflagellate. This 
complex, subcellular 
structure resembles the 
camera-like eye found 
in vertebrates and 
some molluscs. In some 
dinoflagellates, the ocelloid 
may function in prey 
detection.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   648 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 650 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  649
between two species in which one organism lives inside the 
cell or cells of another organism (the host). In particular, as 
we discussed in Concept 25.3, structural, biochemical, and 
DNA sequence data indicate that mitochondria and plastids 
are derived from bacteria that were engulfed by the ancestors 
of early eukaryotic cells. The evidence also suggests that mito-
chondria evolved before plastids. Thus, a defining moment in 
the origin of eukaryotes occurred when a host cell engulfed a 
bacterium that would later become an organelle found in all 
eukaryotes—the mitochondrion.
To determine which bacterial lineage gave rise to mito-
chondria, researchers have compared the DNA sequences of 
mitochondrial genes (mtDNA) to those found in major clades 
of bacteria. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you will interpret 
one such set of DNA sequence comparisons. Collectively, 
such studies indicate that mitochondria arose from an alpha 
proteobacterium (see Figure 27.17). Results from mtDNA 
sequence analyses also indicate that the mitochondria of 
protists, animals, fungi, and plants descended from a single 
common ancestor, thus suggesting that mitochondria arose 
only once over the course of evolution. Similar analyses 
provide evidence that plastids descended from a single com-
mon ancestor—a cyanobacterium that was engulfed by a 
eukaryotic host cell.
Interpreting Comparisons of Genetic 
Sequences
Which Bacteria Are Most Closely Related to 
Mitochondria? Early eukaryotes acquired mitochondria by 
endosymbiosis: A host cell engulfed an aerobic bacterium that 
persisted within the cytoplasm to the mutual benefit of both 
cells. In studying which living bacteria might be most closely 
related to mitochondria, researchers compared DNA sequences 
encoding ribosomal RNA (rRNA), a component of ribosomes. 
Ribosomes perform critical cell functions. Hence, genes encod-
ing rRNA are under strong selection and change slowly over 
time, making them suitable for comparing even distantly related 
species. In this exercise, you will interpret some of the research 
data to draw conclusions about the phylogeny of mitochondria.
How the Research Was Done Researchers isolated and cloned 
DNA sequences from the gene that codes for the small-subunit 
rRNA molecule for the wheat (a eukaryote) mitochondrion and 
for five bacterial species:
• Wheat, used as the source of genes encoding mitochondrial rRNA
• Agrobacterium tumefaciens, an alpha proteobacterium that 
lives within plant tissue and produces tumors in the host
• Comamonas testosteroni, a beta proteobacterium
• Escherichia coli, a well-studied gamma proteobacterium that 
inhabits human intestines
• Mycoplasma capricolum, a gram-positive mycoplasma, which is 
the only group of bacteria lacking cell walls
• Anacystis nidulans, a cyanobacterium
Data from the Research Gene sequences encoding rRNA for 
the wheat mitochondrion and the five bacteria were aligned 
and compared. The data table below, called a comparison matrix, 
Scientific Skills Exercise
Wheat mitochondrion A. tumefaciens C. testosteroni E. coli M. capricolum A. nidulans
Wheat mitochondrion – 48 38 35 34 34
A. tumefaciens – 55 57 52 53
C. testosteroni – 61 52 52
E. coli – 48 52
M. capricolum – 50
A. nidulans –
Data from D. Yang et al., Mitochondrial origins, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 82:4443–4447 (1985).
summarizes the comparison of 617 nucleotide positions from the 
gene sequences. Each value in the table is the percentage of the 
617 nucleotide positions for which the pair of organisms have 
the same base. Any positions that were identical across all six 
RNA-encoding gene sequences were omitted from this compari-
son matrix.
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. First, make sure you understand how to read the comparison 
matrix. (a) Find the cell that represents the comparison of  
C. testosteroni and E. coli. What value is given in this cell? (b) What 
does that value signify about the comparable gene sequences in 
those two organisms? (c) Explain why some cells have a dash rather 
than a value. (d) Why are some cells shaded gray, with no value?
2. Why did the researchers choose one plant mitochondrion and 
five bacterial species to include in the comparison matrix?
3. (a) Which bacterium has an rRNA-encoding gene that is most 
similar to that of the wheat mitochondrion? (b) What is the 
significance of this similarity?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
c Wheat, used  
as the source of 
mitochondrial RNA
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   649 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 651 ===

650 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Progress has also been made toward identifying the host 
cell that engulfed an alpha proteobacterium, thereby setting 
the stage for the origin of eukaryotes. For example, research-
ers recently reported the discovery of a new group of archaea, 
the lokiarchaeotes. In phylogenomic analyses, this group was 
identified as the sister group of the eukaryotes and its genome 
was found to encode many eukaryote-specific features. Was 
the host cell that engulfed an alpha proteobacterium a lokiar-
chaeote? While this could be correct, it is also possible that the 
host belonged to a different lineage of archaea or was closely 
related to the archaea (but was not itself an archaean). In any 
case, current evidence indicates that the host was a relatively 
complex cell in which certain features of eukaryotic cells had 
evolved, such as a cytoskeleton that enabled it to change 
shape (and thereby engulf the alpha proteobacterium).
Plastid Evolution: A Closer Look
As you’ve seen, current evidence indicates that mitochon-
dria are descended from a bacterium that was engulfed by 
a host cell that was an archaean (or a close relative of the 
archaea). This event gave rise to the eukaryotes. There is 
also much evidence that later in eukaryotic history, a lin-
eage of heterotrophic eukaryotes acquired an additional 
endosymbiont—a photosynthetic cyanobacterium—that 
then evolved into plastids. According to the hypothesis illus-
trated in Figure 28.3, this plastid-bearing lineage gave rise to 
two lineages of photosynthetic protists, or algae: red algae 
and green algae.
Let’s examine some of the steps in Figure 28.3 more 
closely. First, recall that cyanobacteria are gram-negative 
and that gram-negative bacteria have two cell membranes, 
an inner plasma membrane and an outer membrane 
that is part of the cell wall (see Figure 27.3). Plastids in 
red algae and green algae are also surrounded by two 
membranes. Transport proteins in these membranes are 
homologous to proteins in the inner and outer membranes 
of cyanobacteria, providing further support for the 
hypothesis that plastids originated from a cyanobacterial 
endosymbiont.
On several occasions during eukaryotic evolution, red algae 
and green algae underwent secondary endosymbiosis, 
meaning they were ingested in the food vacuoles of hetero-
trophic eukaryotes and became endosymbionts themselves. 
For example, protists known as chlorarachniophytes likely 
evolved when a heterotrophic eukaryote engulfed a green 
alga. Evidence for this process can be found within the 
Cyanobacterium
Nucleus
Red alga
Green alga
Euglenids
Chlorarachniophytes
Plastid
Stramenopiles
Alveolates
Heterotrophic
eukaryote One of these
membranes was
lost in red and
green algal
descendants.
Membranes
are represented
as dark lines in
the cell.
123
Primary
endosymbiosis
Secondary
endosymbiosis
Secondary
endosymbiosis
Secondary
endosymbiosis
Plastid
. Figure 28.3 Diversity of plastids produced by endosymbiosis.  Studies of 
plastid-bearing eukaryotes suggest that plastids evolved from a cyanobacterium that 
was engulfed by an ancestral heterotrophic eukaryote (primary endosymbiosis).  
That ancestor then diversified into red algae and green  
algae, some of which were subsequently engulfed by  
other eukaryotes (secondary endosymbiosis).
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, which of 
the following groups are likely to be more closely 
related: stramenopiles and alveolates, or euglenids 
and chlorarachniophytes? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   650 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 652 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  651
Inner plastid
membrane
Outer plastid
membrane
Nucleomorph
Nuclear
pore-like gap
Thylakoid
membranes
c Figure 28.4  
Nucleomorph 
within a plastid of a 
chlorarachniophyte.
engulfed cell, which contains a tiny vestigial nucleus, called 
a!nucleomorph (Figure 28.4). Genes from the nucleomorph are 
still transcribed, and their DNA sequences indicate that the 
engulfed cell was a green alga.
Four Supergroups of Eukaryotes
Our understanding of the evolutionary history of eukary -
otic diversity has been in flux in recent years. Not only has 
kingdom Protista been abandoned, but other hypotheses 
have been discarded as well. For example, many biologists 
once thought that the first lineage to have diverged from 
all other eukaryotes was the amitochondriate protists, organ-
isms without conventional mitochondria and with fewer 
membrane-enclosed organelles than other protist groups. 
But recent structural and DNA data have undermined 
this hypothesis. Many of the so-called amitochondriate 
protists have been shown to have mitochondria—though 
reduced ones—and some of these organisms are now clas -
sified in distantly related groups.
The ongoing changes in our understanding of the phy-
logeny of protists pose challenges to students and instruc-
tors alike. Hypotheses about these relationships are a focus 
of scientific activity, changing rapidly as new data cause 
previous ideas to be modified or discarded. We’ll focus 
here on one current hypothesis: the four supergroups of 
eukaryotes shown in Figure 28.5. Because the root of the 
eukaryotic tree is not known, all four supergroups are 
shown as diverging simultaneously from a common ances-
tor. We know that this is not correct, but we do not know 
which supergroup was the first to diverge from the other 
three. In addition, major new groups of protists have been 
discovered in recent years, but their relationship to the 
supergroups shown in Figure 28.5 has yet to be resolved. 
Examples of such unresolved groups include haptophytes 
and cryptophytes (Figure 28.6), as well as the hemimas-
tigophores, a novel group described in 2018. Overall, as 
(a) (b)
2 om 8 om
. Figure 28.6 A haptophyte and a cryptophyte. Although they 
are major groups of protists, haptophytes and cryptophytes are not 
shown in Figure 28.5 because their phylogenetic relationships have 
yet to be resolved. (a) The haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi is a key 
producer in the ocean. (b) The outer surface of this photosynthetic 
cryptophyte is covered with protective plates. (SEM)
Excavates include protists with 
modified mitochondria and 
protists with unique flagella
Diplomonads
Parabasalids
Euglenozoans
Excavata
SAR
Archaeplastida
Unikonta
Now that we have examined some of the broad patterns in 
eukaryotic evolution, we will look more closely at the four 
main groups of protists shown in Figure 28.5.
We begin with Excavata (the excavates), a clade that was 
originally proposed based on morphological studies of the  
CONCEPT 28.2
1. Cite at least four examples of structural and functional 
diversity among protists.
2. Summarize the role of endosymbiosis in eukaryotic 
evolution.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS After studying Figure 28.3, predict 
how many distinct genomes are contained within the cell of 
a chlorarachniophyte. Explain. (See Figures 7.17 and 7.18.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.1
you read this chapter, it may be helpful to focus less on the 
specific names of groups of organisms and more on why 
the organisms are important and how ongoing research is 
elucidating their evolutionary relationships.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   651 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 653 ===

652 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
The tree below represents a phylogenetic hypothesis for the relationships among eukaryotes on 
Earth today. The eukaryotic groups at the branch tips are related in larger “supergroups,” labeled 
vertically at the far right of the tree. Groups that were formerly classified in the kingdom Protista 
are highlighted in yellow. Dotted lines indicate evolutionary relationships that are uncertain. For 
clarity, this tree only includes representative clades from each supergroup. In addition, the recent 
discoveries of many new groups of eukaryotes indicate that eukaryotic diversity is actually much 
greater than shown here.
Some members of this supergroup (whose 
monophyly has been called into question 
by some recent genomic studies) have an 
“excavated” groove on one side of 
the cell body. T wo major clades (the 
parabasalids and diplomonads) have 
highly reduced mitochondria; members 
of a third clade (the euglenozoans) have 
flagella that differ in structure from 
those of other organisms. Excavates 
include parasites such as Giardia, as well 
as many predatory and photosynthetic 
species.
5 om
Excavata
Giardia intestinalis, a diplomonad 
parasite. This diplomonad (colorized 
SEM), which lacks the characteristic surface 
groove of the Excavata, inhabits the 
intestines of mammals. It can infect people 
when they drink water contaminated with 
feces containing Giardia cysts. Drinking 
such water—even from a seemingly 
pristine stream—can cause severe diarrhea. 
Boiling the water kills the parasite.
Alveolates RhizariansAmoebozoans Opisthokonts
ExcavataDiplomonads
Parabasalids
Euglenozoans
Forams
Radiolarians
Cercozoans
Brown algae
Diatoms
Oomycetes
SARDinoflagellates
Apicomplexans
Ciliates
Green
algae
ArchaeplastidaRed algae
Chlorophytes
Charophytes
Plants
UnikontaEntamoebas
Tubulinids
Slime molds
Nucleariids
Fungi
Choanoflagellates
Animals
Stramenopiles
. Figure 28.5 Exploring Protistan Diversity
DRAW IT Draw a simplified version of this phylogenetic tree that shows 
only the four supergroups of eukaryotes. Now sketch how the tree would 
look if the unikonts were the sister group to all other eukaryotes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   652 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 654 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  653
 
This supergroup contains (and is named after) three large and 
very diverse clades: Stramenopila, Alveolata, and Rhizaria. Stra-
menopiles include some of the most important photosynthetic or-
ganisms on Earth, such as the diatoms shown here. Alveolates also 
include photosynthetic species, as well as important pathogens, 
such as Plasmodium, which causes malaria. According to one 
current hypothesis, stramenopiles and alveolates originated by 
secondary endosymbiosis when a heterotrophic protist engulfed 
a red alga.
    The rhizarian subgroup of SAR includes many species of amoe-
bas, most of which have pseudopodia that are threadlike in shape. 
Pseudopodia are extensions that can 
bulge from any portion of the cell; 
they are used in movement and in 
the capture of prey.
SAR
This supergroup of eukaryotes includes red algae and green algae, 
along with plants. Red algae and green algae include unicellular 
species, colonial species, and multicellular species (including the 
green alga Volvox). Many of the large algae known informally 
as “seaweeds” are multicellular red or green algae. Protists in 
Archaeplastida include key photosynthetic species that form the 
base of the food web in many aquatic communities.
Archaeplastida
This supergroup of eukaryotes, also called Amorphea, includes 
amoebas that have  lobe- or tube-shaped pseudopodia, as well as 
animals, fungi, and non-amoeba protists that are closely related 
to animals or fungi. According to one current hypothesis, the 
unikonts were the first eukaryotic supergroup to diverge from 
all other eukaryotes; however, this hypothesis has yet to be 
widely accepted.
Unikonta
Diatom diversity. These beautiful single-celled protists are 
important photosynthetic organisms in aquatic communities (LM).
Volvox, a multicellular freshwater green alga. This alga has two 
types of differentiated cells, and so it is considered multicellular rather 
than colonial. It resembles a hollow ball whose wall is composed of 
hundreds of biflagellated cells (see inset LM) embedded in a gelatinous 
extracellular matrix; if isolated, these cells cannot reproduce. However, 
the alga also contains cells that are specialized for either sexual or 
asexual reproduction. The large algae shown here will eventually 
release the small “daughter” algae that can be seen within them (LM).
A unikont amoeba. This amoeba, the tubulinid Amoeba 
proteus, is using its pseudopodia to move.
Globigerina, a rhizarian in SAR. This species is a foram, a group 
whose members have threadlike pseudopodia that extend through 
pores in the shell, or test (LM). The inset shows a foram test, which is 
hardened by calcium carbonate.
100om
50 om
20 om
25 om
100 μm
 Mastering Biology Video: Volvox
 Mastering Biology Video: Amoeba Pseudopodium
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   653 14/03/20   5:33 AM

=== SIDE 655 ===

654 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
0.2 om
8 om
Flagella
Crystalline rod
(cross section)
Ring of microtubules
(cross section)
. Figure 28.8 Euglenozoan flagellum. Most euglenozoans have a 
crystalline rod inside one of their flagella (the TEM is a flagellum shown 
in cross section). The rod lies alongside the 9 + 2 ring of microtubules 
found in all eukaryotic flagella (compare with Figure 7.24).
cytoskeleton. Some members of this diverse group also have 
an “excavated” feeding groove on one side of the cell body. 
The excavates include the diplomonads, parabasalids, and 
euglenozoans. Molecular data indicate that each of these 
three groups is monophyletic. In contrast, some recent 
genomic studies indicate that the excavates are not mono-
phyletic, making Excavata the most controversial of our  
four supergroups.
Diplomonads and Parabasalids
The protists in these two groups lack plastids and have highly 
reduced mitochondria (until recently, they were thought to 
lack mitochondria altogether). Most diplomonads and para-
basalids are found in anaerobic environments.
Diplomonads have reduced mitochondria called 
mitosomes. These organelles lack functional electron transport 
chains and hence cannot use oxygen to help extract energy 
from carbohydrates and other organic molecules. Instead, 
diplomonads get the energy they need from anaerobic 
biochemical pathways. Many diplomonads are parasites, 
including the infamous Giardia intestinalis (see Figure 28.5), 
which inhabits the intestines of mammals.
Structurally, diplomonads have two equal-sized nuclei and 
multiple flagella. Recall that eukaryotic flagella are exten-
sions of the cytoplasm, consisting of bundles of microtubules 
covered by the cell’s plasma membrane (see Figure 7.24). 
They are quite different from prokaryotic flagella, which are 
filaments composed of globular proteins attached to the cell 
surface (see Figure 27.7).
Parabasalids also have reduced mitochondria; called 
hydrogenosomes, these organelles generate some energy 
anaerobically, releasing hydrogen gas as a by-product. The 
best-known parabasalid is Trichomonas vaginalis, a sexually 
transmitted parasite that infects about 140 million people 
each year worldwide. T. vaginalis travels along the mucus-
coated lining of the human reproductive and urinary tracts 
by moving its flagella and by undulating part of its plasma 
membrane (Figure 28.7). In females, if the vagina’s normal 
acidity is disturbed, T. vaginalis can outcompete benefi-
cial microorganisms there and infect the vagina. One of 
T.!vaginalis’s genes encodes a product that allows it to feed 
Undulating
membrane
Flagella
5 om
. Figure 28.7 The parabasalid parasite Trichomonas vaginalis. 
(colorized SEM)
on the vaginal lining, promoting infection. Studies sug-
gest that T. vaginalis acquired this gene by horizontal gene 
transfer from bacterial parasites in the vagina. (Trichomonas 
infections also can occur in the urethra of males, though 
often without symptoms.)
Euglenozoans
Protists called euglenozoans belong to a diverse clade that 
includes predatory heterotrophs, photosynthetic autotrophs, 
mixotrophs, and parasites. The main morphological feature 
that distinguishes protists in this clade is the presence of a 
rod with either a spiral or a crystalline structure inside each 
of their flagella (Figure 28.8). The two best-studied groups of 
euglenozoans are the kinetoplastids and the euglenids.
Kinetoplastids
Protists called kinetoplastids have a single, large mito-
chondrion that contains an organized mass of DNA called a 
kinetoplast. These protists include species that feed on prokary-
otes in freshwater, marine, and moist terrestrial ecosystems, 
as well as species that parasitize animals, plants, and other 
protists. For example, kinetoplastids in the genus Trypanosoma 
infect humans and cause sleeping sickness (Figure 28.9), a 
neurological disease that is invariably fatal if not treated. This 
disease currently afflicts about 10,000 people each year, mostly 
in rural areas of Africa. The infection occurs via the bite of a 
vector (carrier) organism, the African tsetse fly. Trypanosomes 
also cause Chagas’ disease, which is transmitted by bloodsuck-
ing insects and can lead to congestive heart failure.
Trypanosomes evade immune responses with an effec-
tive “bait-and-switch” defense. The surface of a trypano-
some is coated with millions of copies of a single protein. 
However, before the host’s immune system can recognize 
the protein and mount an attack, new generations of the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   654 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 656 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  655
parasite switch to another surface protein with a differ-
ent molecular structure. Frequent changes in the surface 
protein prevent the host from developing immunity. (The 
Scientific Skills Exercise in Chapter 47 explores this topic 
further.) About a third of Trypanosoma’s genome is dedi-
cated to producing these surface proteins.
Euglenids
A euglenid has a pocket at one end of the cell from which 
one or two flagella emerge (Figure 28.10). Some euglenids are 
mixotrophs: They perform photosynthesis when sunlight is 
available, but when it is not, they can become heterotrophic, 
absorbing organic nutrients from their environment. Many 
other euglenids engulf prey by phagocytosis.
Short flagellum
Long flagellum
Contractile vacuole
Nucleus
Chloroplast
Plasma membrane
Eyespot: pigmented
organelle that 
functions as a light 
shield, allowing light 
from only a certain
direction to strike 
the light detector
Pellicle: protein bands beneath
the plasma membrane that
provide strength and flexibility
5 om
Euglena (LM)
Light detector: 
swelling near the base 
of the long flagellum; 
detects light that is 
not blocked by the 
eyespot. As a result, 
Euglena moves 
toward light of 
appropriate intensity, 
an important 
adaptation that 
enhances 
photosynthesis.
 Mastering Biology Video: Euglena
/uni25B6 Figure 28.10 Euglena, a euglenid 
commonly found in pond water.
1. Why is it difficult for humans to develop immunity against 
trypanosomes?
2. WHAT IF? DNA sequence data for a diplomonad, a euglenid, 
a plant, and an unidentified protist suggest that the unidenti-
fied species is most closely related to the diplomonad. Further 
studies reveal that the unknown species has fully functional 
mitochondria. Based on these data, at what point on the phy-
logenetic tree in Figure 28.5 did the mystery protist’s lineage 
probably diverge from other eukaryote lineages? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.2
9 om
Trypanosome
Red blood
cell
. Figure 28.9 Trypanosoma, the kinetoplastid that causes 
sleeping sickness. (colorized SEM)
SAR is a highly diverse group 
of protists defined by DNA 
similarities
Ciliates
Alveolates
Stramenopiles
Rhizarians
Oomycetes
Brown algae
Diatoms
Cercozoans
Forams
Radiolarians
Apicomplexans
Dinoflagellates
Excavata
Archaeplastida SAR
Unikonta
Our second supergroup, referred to as SAR, was proposed 
recently based on whole-genome DNA sequence analyses. 
These studies found that three major clades of protists—the 
stramenopiles, alveolates, and rhizarians—form a monophy-
letic supergroup. This supergroup contains a large, extremely 
diverse collection of protists. To date, this supergroup has not 
CONCEPT 28.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   655 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 657 ===

656 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
40 om
the surface of the sea may 
contain millions of these 
microscopic algae. The 
abundance of diatoms 
in the past is also evident 
in the fossil record, where 
massive accumulations of 
fossilized diatom walls are 
major constituents of sediments known as diatomaceous earth. 
These sediments are mined for their quality as a filtering 
medium and for many other uses.
Diatoms are so widespread and abundant that their pho-
tosynthetic activity affects global carbon dioxide (CO2) lev-
els. Diatoms have this effect in part because of events that 
occur during episodes of rapid population growth, or blooms, 
when ample nutrients are available. Typically, diatoms are 
eaten by a variety of protists and invertebrates, but during a 
bloom, many escape this fate. When these uneaten diatoms 
die, their bodies sink to the ocean floor. It takes decades, or 
even centuries, for dead diatoms that sink to the ocean floor 
to be broken down by bacteria and other decomposers. As a 
result, the carbon in their bodies remains there for some time, 
rather than being released immediately as CO2 as the decom-
posers respire. The overall effect of these events is that CO2 
absorbed by diatoms during photosynthesis is transported, or 
“pumped,” to the ocean floor.
With an eye toward reducing global warming by lowering 
atmospheric CO2 levels, some scientists advocate promoting 
diatom blooms by fertilizing the ocean with essential 
nutrients such as iron. In one recent study, researchers 
found that CO2 was indeed pumped to the ocean floor 
after iron was!added to a small region of the ocean. Further 
tests are planned to examine whether iron fertilization has 
undesirable side effects (such as oxygen depletion or the 
production of nitrous oxide, a more potent greenhouse 
gas!than CO2).
Brown Algae
The largest and most complex algae are brown algae. All are 
multicellular, and most are marine. Brown algae are especially 
common along temperate coasts that have cold-water cur-
rents. They owe their characteristic brown or olive color to 
the carotenoids in their plastids.
Many of the species commonly called “seaweeds” are brown 
algae. Some brown algal seaweeds have specialized structures 
that resemble organs in plants, such as a rootlike holdfast, 
which anchors the alga, and a stemlike stipe, which supports 
the leaflike blades (Figure 28.13). Unlike plants, however, 
brown algae lack true tissues and organs. Moreover, morpho-
logical and DNA data show that these similarities evolved 
Hairy
flagellum
Smooth
flagellum
2.5 om
. Figure 28.11 Stramenopile flagella. Most stramenopiles, such 
as Synura petersenii, have two flagella: one covered with fine, stiff 
hairs and a shorter one that is smooth.
c Figure 28.12 The 
diatom Triceratium 
morlandii. (colorized SEM)
received a formal name but is instead known by the first let-
ters of its major clades: SAR.
Some morphological and DNA sequence data suggest that 
two of these groups, the stramenopiles and alveolates, origi-
nated more than a billion years ago, when a common ancestor 
of these two clades engulfed a single-celled, photosynthetic 
red alga. Because red algae are thought to have originated by 
primary endosymbiosis (see Figure 28.3), such an origin for 
the stramenopiles and alveolates is referred to as secondary 
endosymbiosis. Others question this idea, noting that some 
species in these groups lack plastids or their remnants (includ-
ing any trace of plastid genes in their nuclear DNA).
Despite its lack of a formal name, the SAR supergroup rep-
resents the best current hypothesis for the phylogeny of the 
three large protist clades to which we now turn.
Stramenopiles
One major subgroup of SAR, the stramenopiles, includes 
some of the most important photosynthetic organisms on the 
planet. Their name (from the Latin stramen, straw, and pilos, 
hair) refers to their characteristic flagellum, which has numer-
ous fine, hairlike projections. In most stramenopiles, this 
“hairy” flagellum is paired with a shorter “smooth” (nonhairy) 
flagellum (Figure 28.11). Here we’ll focus on three groups of 
stramenopiles: diatoms, oomycetes, and brown algae.
Diatoms
A key group of photosynthetic protists, diatoms are unicel-
lular algae that have a unique glass-like wall made of silicon 
dioxide embedded in an organic matrix (Figure 28.12). The 
wall consists of two parts that overlap like a shoe box and its 
lid. These walls provide effective protection from the crush-
ing jaws of predators: Live diatoms can withstand pressures as 
great as 1.4 million kg/m2, equal to the pressure under each 
leg of a table supporting an elephant!
With an estimated 100,000 living species, diatoms are a 
highly diverse group of protists (see Figure 28.5). They are 
among the most abundant photosynthetic organisms both 
in the ocean and in lakes: One bucket of water scooped from 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   656 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 658 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  657
independently in the algal and plant lineages and are thus 
analogous, not homologous. In addition, while plants have 
adaptations (such as rigid stems) that provide support against 
gravity, brown algae have adaptations that enable their main 
photosynthetic surfaces (the leaflike blades) to be near the 
water surface. Some brown algae accomplish this task with gas-
filled, bubble-shaped floats. Giant brown algae known as kelps 
that live in deep waters have such floats in their blades, which 
are attached to stipes that can rise as much as 60 m from the 
seafloor—more than half the length of a football field.
Brown algae are important commodities for humans. Some 
species are eaten, such as Laminaria (Japanese “kombu”), 
which is used in soups. In addition, the cell walls of brown 
algae contain a gel-forming substance, called algin, which is 
used to thicken many processed foods, including pudding 
and salad dressing.
Alternation of Generations
A variety of life cycles have evolved among the multicellular 
algae. The most complex life cycles include an alternation 
of generations, the alternation of multicellular haploid and 
diploid forms, as shown in Figure 28.14 for the brown alga 
Sporangia
Female
Male
Egg
Developing 
sporophyte   
Zoospore
Zygote
(2n)
Sporophyte
(2n)
Gametophytes
(n)
Sperm
Mature female
gametophyte
(n)
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
     The sporophytes are usually 
found in water just below the 
line of the lowest tides, attached
to rocks by branching holdfasts.
1
     Cells on the surface 
of the blade develop
into sporangia.
2
     Sporangia produce
zoospores by meiosis.
3
     The zoospores are all
structurally alike, but
about half of them divide
asexually (by mitosis)
and develop into male
gametophytes; the other 
half divide asexually
and develop into
female gametophytes.
4
     Male gametophytes release sperm, 
and female gametophytes produce eggs, 
which remain attached to the female 
gametophyte. Eggs secrete a chemical
signal that attracts sperm of the same 
species, thereby increasing the 
probability of fertilization in the ocean.
5
The zygotes
grow into new
sporophytes
while attached
to the remains
of the female
gametophyte.
7
     Sperm fertilize
the eggs.
6
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
. Figure 28.14 The life cycle of the brown alga Laminaria: 
an example of alternation of generations.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this diagram, are the 
sperm shown in 5 genetically identical to one  
another? Explain.
Blade
Stipe
Holdfast
. Figure 28.13 Seaweeds: adapted to life at the ocean’s 
margins. The sea palm (Postelsia) lives on rocks along the coast 
of the northwestern United States and western Canada. The body 
of this brown alga is well adapted to maintaining a firm foothold 
despite the crashing surf.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   657 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 659 ===

658 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
(a)Closeup of oomycete 
hyphae (LM)
(b)Water mold hyphae 
growing on a goldfish
100 om
. Figure 28.15 Oomycetes.
AlveoliFlagellum
Alveolate0.2 om
. Figure 28.16 Alveoli. These sacs under the plasma membrane 
are a characteristic that distinguishes alveolates from other 
eukaryotes (TEM).
are key differences between oomycetes and fungi. Among 
them, oomycetes typically have cell walls made of cellulose, 
whereas the walls of fungi consist mainly of another poly-
saccharide, chitin. Data from molecular systematics have 
confirmed that oomycetes are not closely related to fungi. 
In both oomycetes and fungi, the high surface-to-volume 
ratio of filamentous structures enhances the uptake of 
nutrients from the environment.
Although oomycetes descended from plastid-bearing 
ancestors, they no longer have plastids and do not perform 
photosynthesis. Instead, they typically acquire nutrients as 
decomposers or parasites. Most water molds are decompos-
ers that grow as cottony masses on dead algae and animals, 
mainly in freshwater habitats (Figure 28.15b). White rusts 
and downy mildews generally live on land as plant parasites.
The ecological impact of oomycetes can be significant. 
For example, the oomycete Phytophthora infestans causes 
potato late blight, which turns the stalks and stems of 
potato (and tomato) plants into black slime. Late blight 
contributed to the devastating Irish famine of the 19th cen-
tury, in which a million people died and at least that many 
were forced to leave Ireland. The disease remains a major 
problem today, causing crop losses as high as 70% in some 
regions. Globally, about $1 billion is spent each year on pes-
ticides to control the parasite.
Alveolates
Members of the next subgroup of SAR, the alveolates, have 
membrane-enclosed sacs (alveoli) just under the plasma 
membrane (Figure 28.16). Alveolates are abundant in many 
habitats and include a wide range of photosynthetic and het-
erotrophic protists. We’ll discuss three alveolate clades here: 
a group of flagellates (the dinoflagellates), a group of parasites 
(the apicomplexans), and a group of protists that move using 
cilia (the ciliates).
Laminaria. Although haploid and diploid conditions alternate 
in all sexual life cycles—human gametes, for example, are 
haploid—the term alternation of generations applies only to life 
cycles in which both haploid and diploid stages are multicel-
lular. As you will read in Concept 29.1, alternation of genera-
tions also evolved in plants.
As detailed in Figure 28.14, the diploid individual in 
this!complex algal life cycle is called the sporophyte because 
it produces spores. The spores are haploid and move by 
means of flagella; they are called zoospores. The zoospores 
divide by mitosis and develop into haploid, multicellular 
male and female gametophytes, which produce gametes. 
The union of two gametes (fertilization) results in a diploid 
zygote, which matures and gives rise to a new multicellular 
sporophyte.
In Laminaria, the two generations are heteromorphic, 
meaning that the sporophytes and gametophytes are struc-
turally different. Other algal life cycles have an alternation 
of isomorphic generations, in which the sporophytes and 
gametophytes look similar to each other, although they differ 
in chromosome number.
Oomycetes (Water Molds and Their Relatives)
Oomycetes include the water molds, the white rusts, 
and the downy mildews. Based on their morphology, 
these organisms were previously classified as fungi (in 
fact, oomycete means “egg fungus”). For example, many 
oomycetes have multinucleate filaments (hyphae) that 
resemble fungal hyphae (Figure 28.15a). However, there 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   658 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 660 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  659
Dinoflagellates
The cells of many dinoflagellates are reinforced by cellu-
lose plates. Grooves in this “armor” house two flagella, one of 
which causes dinoflagellates (from the Greek dinos, whirling) 
to spin as they move through the waters of their marine and 
freshwater communities (Figure 28.17a).
Although their ancestors may have originated by second-
ary endosymbiosis (see Figure 28.3), roughly half of all  
dinoflagellate species are now purely heterotrophic. Others 
are important species of phytoplankton (photosynthetic  
plankton, which include photosynthetic bacteria as well  
as algae); many photosynthetic dinoflagellates are 
mixotrophic.
Periods of explosive population growth (blooms) in dino-
flagellates sometimes cause a phenomenon called “red tide” 
(Figure 28.17b). The blooms make coastal waters appear 
brownish red or pink because of the presence of carotenoids, 
the most common pigments in dinoflagellate plastids. When 
4 om
Flagella
(a)Dinoflagellate flagella. 
Beating of the spiral 
flagellum, which lies in a 
groove that encircles the 
cell, makes this specimen 
of Pfiesteria shumwayae 
spin (colorized SEM).
(b)Red tide in the Gulf 
of Carpentaria in 
northern Australia. 
The red color is due to 
high concentrations of 
a carotenoid-containing 
dinoflagellate.
. Figure 28.17 Dinoflagellates.
 Mastering Biology Video: Dinoflagellate
blooms occur, toxins produced by certain dinoflagellates 
have caused massive kills of invertebrates and fishes. Humans 
who eat molluscs that have accumulated the toxins are 
affected as well, sometimes fatally. A 2017 study found that 
ocean warming (caused by ongoing climate change) has facil-
itated more frequent blooms of toxic dinoflagellates, making 
them a growing threat to human health.
Apicomplexans
Nearly all apicomplexans are parasites of animals—and 
virtually all animal species examined so far are attacked  
by these parasites. The parasites spread through their host 
as tiny infectious cells called sporozoites. Apicomplexans  
are so named because one end (the apex) of the sporozoite  
cell contains a complex of organelles specialized for 
penetrating host cells and tissues. Although apicomplexans 
are not photosynthetic, recent data show that they  
retain a modified plastid (apicoplast), most likely of red 
algal origin.
Most apicomplexans have intricate life cycles with both 
sexual and asexual stages. Those life cycles often require 
two or more host species for completion. For example, 
Plasmodium, the parasite that causes malaria, lives in both 
mosquitoes and humans (Figure 28.18).
Historically, malaria has rivaled tuberculosis as the 
leading cause of human death by infectious disease. The 
incidence of malaria was diminished in the 1960s by 
insecticides that reduced carrier populations of Anopheles 
mosquitoes and by drugs that killed Plasmodium in 
humans. But the emergence of resistant varieties of both 
Anopheles and Plasmodium has led to a resurgence of 
malaria. About 220 million people in the tropics are cur -
rently infected, and 450,000 die each year. In regions 
where malaria is common, the lethal effects of this disease 
have resulted in the evolution of high frequencies of the 
sickle-cell allele; for an explanation of this connection, 
see Figure 23.18.
The search for malarial vaccines has been hampered by 
the fact that Plasmodium lives mainly inside cells, hidden 
from the host’s immune system. And, like trypanosomes, 
Plasmodium continually changes its surface proteins. Even 
so, significant progress was made when European regulators 
recently approved the world’s first licensed malarial vaccine. 
In 2019, routine use of this vaccine began in selected regions 
of Africa. However, this vaccine, which targets a protein on 
the surface of sporozoites, provides only partial protection 
against malaria. As a result, researchers continue to study 
other potential vaccine targets, including the apicoplast. 
This approach may be effective because the apicoplast is a 
modified plastid; as such, it descended from a cyanobacte-
rium and hence has different metabolic pathways from those 
in human patients.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   659 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 661 ===

660 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
Red blood
cells
Merozoite
(n)
Zygote
(2n)
Merozoite
Liver
Gametes
Oocyst
Sporozoites
(n)
Inside humanInside mosquito
ApexRed blood 
cell
0.5 om
Liver cell
Gametocytes
(n)
An oocyst develops
from the zygote in the wall 
of the mosquito’s gut. The 
oocyst releases thousands 
of sporozoites, which 
migrate to the mosquito’s 
salivary gland.
8
Fertilization occurs
in the mosquito’s
digestive tract, and a 
zygote forms.
7
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
     The merozoites divide 
asexually inside the red 
blood cells. At intervals of 
48 or 72 hours (depending 
on the species), large 
numbers of merozoites 
break out of the blood 
cells, causing periodic chills 
and fever. Some of the 
merozoites infect other 
red blood cells.
3
     An infected Anopheles 
mosquito bites a person, 
injecting Plasmodium 
sporozoites in its saliva.
1
     The sporozoites enter the person’s 
liver cells. After several days, the sporozoites 
undergo multiple mitotic divisions and become 
merozoites, which use their apical complex
to penetrate red blood cells (see TEM below).
2
     Some merozoites 
form gametocytes.
4
     Another Anopheles mosquito bites the infected person 
and picks up Plasmodium gametocytes along with blood.
5     Gametes form from gametocytes; each male 
gametocyte produces several slender male gametes.
6
. Figure 28.18 The two-host life cycle of 
Plasmodium, the apicomplexan that causes 
malaria.
? Are morphological differences between 
sporozoites, merozoites, and gametocytes  
caused by different genomes  
or by differences in gene  
expression? Explain.
 Mastering Biology  
Animation: Life Cycle  
of a Malaria Parasite
(Figure 28.19b). Ciliates generally reproduce asexually by 
binary fission, during which the existing macronucleus dis-
integrates and a new one is formed from the cell’s micronu-
clei. Each macronucleus typically contains multiple copies 
of the ciliate’s genome. Genes in the macronucleus control 
the everyday functions of the cell, such as feeding, waste 
removal, and maintaining water balance.
Ciliates
The ciliates are a large and varied group of protists named for 
their use of cilia to move and feed (Figure 28.19a). Most ciliates 
are predators, typically of bacteria or of other protists. Their cilia 
may completely cover the cell surface or may be clustered in a few 
rows or tufts. In certain species, rows of tightly packed cilia func-
tion collectively in locomotion. Other ciliates scurry about on 
leg-like structures constructed from many cilia bonded together.
A distinctive feature of ciliates is the presence of two types 
of nuclei: tiny micronuclei and large macronuclei. A!cell has 
one or more nuclei of each type. Genetic variation results 
from conjugation, a sexual process in which two individu-
als exchange haploid micronuclei but do not reproduce 
 Mastering Biology Video: Ciliate Movement in Stentor
Rhizarians
Our next subgroup of SAR is the rhizarians. Many species 
in this group are amoebas, protists that move and feed by 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   660 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 662 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  661
across many distantly related eukaryotic taxa. Most amoe-
bas that are rhizarians differ morphologically from other 
amoebas by having threadlike pseudopodia. Rhizarians also 
include flagellated (non-amoeboid) protists that feed using 
threadlike pseudopodia.
means of pseudopodia, extensions that may bulge from 
almost anywhere on the cell surface. An amoeba moves by 
extending a pseudopodium and anchoring its tip; more cyto-
plasm then streams into the pseudopodium. Amoebas do not 
constitute a monophyletic group; instead, they are dispersed 
Conjugation
Asexual
reproduction
Key
     Two rounds of 
binary fission yield 
four daughter cells.
9
     Four micro-
nuclei become 
macronuclei.
8      Three rounds 
of mitosis produce 
eight micronuclei.
7      The two 
micronuclei fuse.
6
     The cells swap 
one micronucleus.
4
Paramecium constantly takes in water
by osmosis from its hypotonic 
environment. Bladderlike contractile 
vacuoles accumulate excess water from 
radial canals and periodically expel it 
through the plasma membrane.
Thousands of cilia cover the 
surface of Paramecium.
Cilia along a funnel-shaped oral groove 
move food (mainly bacteria) into the 
cell mouth, where the food is engulfed 
into food vacuoles by phagocytosis.
Food vacuoles fuse with lysosomes (not 
shown). As the food is digested, the 
vacuoles follow a looping path through 
the cell. Wastes are released when the 
vacuoles fuse with a specialized region 
of the plasma membrane that functions 
as an anal pore.
Contractile
vacuole
Micronucleus
(a) Feeding, waste removal, and water balance
(b) Conjugation and reproduction
Oral groove
Cell mouth
Macronucleus
50 om
     Two cells of compatible
mating strains align side
by side and partially fuse.
     Meiosis of micronuclei 
produces four haploid 
micronuclei in each cell.
     The cells 
separate.
     Three micronuclei in each cell 
disintegrate. The remaining micro-
nucleus in each cell divides by mitosis.
Diploid
micronucleus
Diploid
micronucleus
Haploid
micronucleus
MEIOSIS
MICRONUCLEAR
FUSION
Compatible
mates
The original
macronucleus
disintegrates.
1 2
5
3
. Figure 28.19 Structure and function in the ciliate Paramecium caudatum.
MAKE CONNECTIONS The events shown in steps 4 through 6 of this diagram have 
a similar overall effect to what event in the human life cycle (see Figure 13.5)? Explain.
 Mastering Biology Video: Paramecium
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   661 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 663 ===

662 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Chromatophore
5 om
. Figure 28.22 A second case of primary endosymbiosis? 
The cercozoan Paulinella conducts photosynthesis in a unique 
sausage-shaped structure called a chromatophore (LM). 
Chromatophore membranes include a peptidoglycan layer, 
indicating that they are derived from a bacterium. DNA evidence 
shows that chromatophores are derived from a different 
cyanobacterium than that from which plastids are derived.
remains of other protists, the fossilized tests of forams are part 
of marine sediments, including sedimentary rocks that are 
now land formations. Foram fossils are excellent markers for 
correlating the ages of sedimentary rocks in different parts of 
the world. Researchers are also studying these fossils to obtain 
information about climate change and its effects on the 
oceans and their life (Figure 28.21).
Cercozoans
First identified in molecular phylogenies, the cercozoans are 
a large group of amoeboid and flagellated protists that feed 
using threadlike pseudopodia. Cercozoan protists are com-
mon inhabitants of marine, freshwater, and soil ecosystems.
We’ll examine three groups of rhizarians here: radiolar-
ians, forams, and cercozoans.
Radiolarians
The protists called radiolarians have delicate, intricately 
symmetrical internal skeletons that are generally made 
of silica. The pseudopodia of these mostly marine pro-
tists radiate from the central body (Figure 28.20) and are 
reinforced by bundles of microtubules. The microtubules 
are covered by a thin layer of cytoplasm, which engulfs 
smaller microorganisms that become attached to the pseu-
dopodia. Cytoplasmic streaming then carries the captured 
prey into the main part of the cell. After radiolarians die, 
their skeletons settle to the seafloor, where they have 
accumulated as an ooze that is hundreds of meters thick in 
some locations.
200 om
Pseudopodia
. Figure 28.20 A radiolarian. Numerous threadlike pseudopodia 
radiate from the central body of this radiolarian (LM).
. Figure 28.21 Fossil forams. By measuring the magnesium 
content in fossilized forams like these, researchers seek to learn how 
ocean temperatures have changed over time. Forams take up more 
magnesium in warmer water than in colder water.
Forams
The protists called foraminiferans (from the Latin 
foramen, little hole, and ferre, to bear), or forams, 
are named for their porous shells, called tests (see 
Figure 28.5). Foram tests consist of a single piece of organic 
material that typically is hardened with calcium carbonate. 
The pseudopodia that extend through the pores function 
in swimming, test formation, and feeding. Many forams 
also derive nourishment from the photosynthesis of sym-
biotic algae that live within the tests.
Forams are found in both the ocean and fresh water. Most 
species live in sand or attach themselves to rocks or algae, 
but some live as plankton. The largest forams, though single-
celled, have tests several centimeters in diameter.
Ninety percent of all identified species of forams are 
known from fossils. Along with the calcium-containing 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   662 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 664 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  663
plants in Chapters 29 and 30; here we will look at the diver-
sity of their closest algal relatives, red algae and green algae.
Red Algae
Many of the 6,000 known species of red algae (rhodo-
phytes, from the Greek rhodos, red) are reddish, owing to the 
photosynthetic pigment phycoerythrin, which masks the 
green of chlorophyll (Figure 28.23). However, other species 
(those adapted to shallow water) have less phycoerythrin. As 
a result, red algal species may be greenish red in very shallow 
water, bright red at moderate depths, and almost black in 
deep water. Some species lack pigmentation altogether and 
live as heteroptrophic parasites on other red algae.
1. Explain why forams have such a well-preserved fossil record.
2. WHAT IF? Would you expect the plastid DNA of photo-
synthetic dinoflagellates and diatoms to be more similar 
to the nuclear DNA of plants (domain Eukarya) or to the 
chromosomal DNA of cyanobacteria (domain Bacteria)? 
Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Which of the three life cycles in 
Figure 13.6 exhibits alternation of generations? How does it 
differ from the other two?
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figures 10.2 and 11.5, and 
then summarize how CO2 and O2 are both used and pro-
duced by chlorarachniophytes and other aerobic algae.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.3
Red algae and green algae are 
the closest relatives of plants
Red algae
Plants
Green algaeChlorophytes
Archaeplastida
Charophytes
Excavata
SAR
Unikonta
As described earlier, morphological and molecular evidence 
indicates that plastids arose when a heterotrophic protist 
acquired a cyanobacterial endosymbiont. Later, photosyn-
thetic descendants of this ancient protist evolved into red 
algae and green algae (see Figure 28.3), and the lineage that 
produced green algae then gave rise to plants. Together, red 
algae, green algae, and plants make up our third eukaryotic 
supergroup, which is called Archaeplastida. Archaeplastida 
is a monophyletic group that descended from the ancient 
protist that engulfed a cyanobacterium. We will examine 
CONCEPT 28.4
Most cercozoans are heterotrophs. Many are parasites of 
plants, animals, or other protists; many others are preda-
tors. The predators include the most important consumers 
of bacteria in aquatic and soil ecosystems, along with spe-
cies that eat other protists, fungi, and even small animals. 
One small group of cercozoans, the chlorarachniophytes 
(mentioned earlier in the discussion of secondary endosym-
biosis), are mixotrophic: These organisms ingest smaller 
protists and bacteria as well as perform photosynthesis. At 
least one other cercozoan, Paulinella chromatophora, is an 
autotroph, deriving its energy from light and its carbon 
from CO2. Paulinella (Figure 28.22) appears to represent an 
intriguing additional evolutionary example of a eukaryotic 
lineage that obtained its photosynthetic apparatus directly 
from a cyanobacterium.
8 mm
c Bonnemaisonia 
hamifera. This red alga 
has a filamentous form.
b Dulse (Palmaria palmata). 
This edible species has a 
    ”leafy” form.
The seaweed is 
grown on nets in 
shallow coastal 
waters.
Paper-thin, glossy sheets of dried nori 
make a mineral-rich wrap for rice, 
seafood, and vegetables in sushi.
. Nori. The red alga Porphyra is the source of 
a traditional Japanese food.
. Figure 28.23 Red algae.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   663 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 665 ===

664 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
 Mastering Biology Animation: Alternation of Generations  
in a Protist
1. Contrast red algae and brown algae.
2. Why is it accurate to say that Ulva is truly multicellular but 
Caulerpa is not?
3. WHAT IF? Suggest a possible reason why species in the 
green algal lineage may have been more likely to colonize 
land than species in the red algal lineage.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.4
2. The formation of true multicellular bodies by cell divi-
sion and differentiation, as in Volvox (see Figure 28.5)  
and Ulva (Figure 28.24b).
3. The repeated division of nuclei with no cytoplasmic 
division, as in Caulerpa (Figure 28.24c).
Most chlorophytes have complex life cycles, with both 
sexual and asexual reproductive stages. Nearly all species of 
chlorophytes reproduce sexually by means of biflagellated 
gametes that have cup-shaped chloroplasts (Figure 28.25). 
Alternation of generations has evolved in some chlorophytes, 
including Ulva.
Red algae are abundant in the warm coastal waters of tropi-
cal oceans. Some of their photosynthetic pigments, including 
phycoerythrin, allow them to absorb blue and green light, 
which penetrate relatively far into the water. A species of red 
alga has been discovered near the Bahamas at a depth of more 
than 260 m. There are also a small number of freshwater and 
terrestrial species.
Most red algae are multicellular. Although none are as 
big as the giant brown kelps, the largest multicellular red 
algae are included in the informal designation “seaweeds.” 
You may have eaten one of these multicellular red algae, 
Porphyra (Japanese “nori”), as crispy sheets or as a wrap for 
sushi (see Figure 28.23). Red algae reproduce sexually and 
have diverse life cycles in which alternation of generations 
is common. However, unlike other algae, red algae do not 
have flagellated gametes, so they depend on water currents 
to bring gametes together for fertilization.
Green Algae
The grass-green chloroplasts of green algae have a struc-
ture and pigment composition much like the chloroplasts 
of!plants. Molecular systematics and cellular morphology 
leave little doubt that green algae and plants are closely 
related. In fact, some systematists now advocate including 
green algae in an expanded “plant” kingdom, Viridiplantae 
(from the Latin viridis, green). Phylogenetically, this 
change makes sense, since otherwise the green algae are 
a!paraphyletic group.
Green algae can be divided into two main groups, the cha-
rophytes and the chlorophytes. The charophytes include the 
algae most closely related to plants, and we will discuss them 
along with plants in Chapter 29.
The second group, the chlorophytes (from the Greek 
chloros, green), includes more than 7,000 species. Most live 
in fresh water, but there are also many marine and some ter-
restrial species. The simplest chlorophytes are unicellular 
organisms such as Chlamydomonas, which resemble gametes 
of more complex chlorophytes. Various species of unicel-
lular chlorophytes live independently in aquatic habitats as 
phytoplankton or inhabit damp soil. Some live symbiotically 
within other eukaryotes, contributing part of their photo-
synthetic output to the food supply of their hosts. Still other 
chlorophytes live in environments exposed to intense vis-
ible and ultraviolet radiation; these species are protected by 
radiation-blocking compounds in their cytoplasm, cell wall, 
or zygote coat.
Larger size and greater complexity evolved in green algae 
by three different mechanisms:
1. The formation of colonies of individual cells, as  
seen in Pediastrum (Figure 28.24a) and other species  
that contribute to the stringy masses known as pond 
scum.
Ulva, or sea 
lettuce. This 
multicellular, edible 
chlorophyte has 
differentiated 
structures, such as 
its leaflike blades 
and a rootlike 
holdfast that 
anchors the alga.
Caulerpa, an 
intertidal chloro-
phyte. The branched 
filaments lack cross-
walls and thus are 
multinucleate. In 
effect, the body of 
this alga is one huge 
”supercell.”
(b)
Pediastrum, a pond alga. 
Chlorophytes in this genus 
form daughter colonies with 
the same number and 
arrangement of cells as the 
parent colony. 
(a)
(c)
2 cm
10 om
. Figure 28.24 Examples of large chlorophytes.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   664 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 666 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  665
. Figure 28.25 The life cycle of Chlamydomonas, a unicellular chlorophyte.
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
Flagella
Cell wall
Cross 
section of
cup-shaped
chloroplast 
(TEM)
Nucleus
Zygote
(2n)
Zoospore Mature cell
(n)
Gamete
(n)
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
+
–
+
+
+
– 
– 
–
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
1     In Chlamydomonas,
mature cells are haploid 
and contain a single 
cup-shaped chloroplast.
     In response to a nutrient shortage, 
drying of the enviroment, or other 
stress, cells develop into gametes.
2
     Gametes of different 
mating types (designated 
+ and –) fuse (fertilization), 
forming a diploid zygote.
3
     The zygote secretes 
a durable coat that 
protects the cell from 
harsh conditions.
4
     After a dormant period, 
meiosis produces four haploid 
individuals (two of each mating 
type) that emerge and mature.
5
These daughter cells develop
flagella and cell walls and then emerge as 
swimming zoospores from the parent cell.
The zoospores develop into mature 
haploid cells.
7
      When a mature cell reproduces 
asexually, it resorbs its flagella and then 
undergoes two rounds of mitosis, forming 
four cells (more in some species).
6
1 om
VISUAL SKILLS Circle the stage(s) in the diagram in which clones are 
formed, producing additional new daughter cells that are genetically 
identical to the parent cell(s).
Unikonts include protists that 
are closely related to fungi and 
animals
Excavata
Nucleariids
UnikontaFungi
Tubulinids
Slime molds
Entamoebas
Choanoflagellates
Animals
SAR
Archaeplastida
Unikonta (also called Amorphea) is an extremely diverse 
supergroup of eukaryotes that includes animals, fungi, and 
some protists. There are two major clades of unikonts, the 
amoebozoans (tubulinids and close protist relatives) and 
the opisthokonts (animals, fungi, and closely related protist 
CONCEPT 28.5 groups). Each of these two major clades is strongly supported 
by molecular systematics. Support for the close relationship 
between amoebozoans and opisthokonts is provided by com-
parisons of myosin proteins and by some (but not all) studies 
based on multiple genes or whole genomes.
An ongoing debate involving the unikonts concerns the 
root of the eukaryotic tree. Recall that the root of a phylo-
genetic tree anchors the tree in time: Branch points close to 
the root are the oldest. At present, the root of the eukary-
otic tree is uncertain; hence, we do not know which super-
group of eukaryotes was the first to diverge from all other 
eukaryotes. If the root of the eukaryotic tree were known, 
it would help scientists infer characteristics of the common 
ancestor of all eukaryotes.
In trying to determine the root of the eukaryotic tree, 
researchers have based their phylogenies on different sets of 
genes, with conflicting results. Researchers have also tried a 
different approach, based on tracing the evolutionary history 
of genes that were transferred to eukaryotes from bacterial 
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   665 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 667 ===

666 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Tubulinids
Tubulinids constitute a large and varied group of amoebozo-
ans that have lobe- or tube-shaped pseudopodia. These uni-
cellular protists are ubiquitous in soil as well as freshwater and 
marine environments. Most are heterotrophs that actively 
seek and consume bacteria and other protists; one such tubu-
linid species, Amoeba proteus, is shown in Figure 28.5. Some 
tubulinids also feed on detritus (nonliving organic matter).
Slime Molds
Slime molds, or mycetozoans (from the Latin, meaning “fun-
gus animals”), once were thought to be fungi because, like 
fungi, they produce fruiting bodies that aid in spore dispersal. 
However, DNA sequence analyses indicate that the resem-
blance between slime molds and fungi is a case of evolution-
ary convergence. Slime molds have diverged into two main 
branches, plasmodial slime molds and cellular slime molds. 
We’ll compare their characteristics and life cycles.
Plasmodial Slime Molds Many plasmodial slime molds 
are brightly colored, often yellow or orange (Figure 28.27). 
As they grow, they form a mass called a plasmodium, which 
can be many centimeters in diameter. (Don’t confuse a slime 
mold’s plasmodium with the genus Plasmodium, which 
includes the parasitic apicomplexan that causes malaria.) 
Despite its size, the plasmodium is not multicellular; it is a sin-
gle mass of cytoplasm that is undivided by plasma membranes 
and that contains many nuclei. This “supercell” is the product 
of mitotic nuclear divisions that are not followed by cytokine-
sis. The plasmodium extends pseudopodia through moist soil, 
leaf mulch, or rotting logs, engulfing food particles by phago-
cytosis as it grows. If the habitat begins to dry up or there is no 
food left, the plasmodium stops growing and differentiates 
into fruiting bodies that function in sexual reproduction.
Cellular Slime Molds The life cycle of the protists called 
cellular slime molds can prompt us to question what it means 
to be an individual organism. The feeding stage of these organ-
isms consists of solitary cells that function individually, but 
when food is depleted, the cells form a slug-like aggregate that 
functions as a unit (Figure 28.28). Unlike the feeding stage 
(plasmodium) of a plasmodial slime mold, these aggregated 
cells remain separated by their individual plasma membranes. 
Ultimately, the aggregated cells form an asexual fruiting body.
4 cm
c Figure 28.27  
A mature 
plasmodium, the 
feeding stage in 
the life cycle of a 
plasmodial slime 
mold. donors (Figure 28.26). Results from this approach indicate 
that Excavata, SAR, and Archaeplastida share a more recent 
common ancestor than any of them does with Unikonta. 
This suggests that the root of the tree is located between the 
unikonts and all other eukaryotes, which implies that the 
unikonts were the first eukaryotic supergroup to diverge from 
all other eukaryotes. This idea remains controversial and will 
require more supporting evidence to be widely accepted.
Amoebozoans
The amoebozoan clade includes many species of amoebas 
that have lobe- or tube-shaped pseudopodia rather than the 
threadlike pseudopodia found in rhizarians. Amoebozoans 
include tubulinids, slime molds, and entamoebas.
. Figure 28.26 Inquiry
Experiment Responding to the difficulty in determining 
the root of the eukaryotic phylogenetic tree, Romain Derelle 
and colleagues used a new approach. They studied 39 nuclear 
genes that eukaryotes acquired by horizontal gene transfer 
from a single bacterial source: the alpha proteobacterium 
endosymbiont that gave rise to the mitochondrion. These 39 
genes were known to be orthologous (see Figure 22.18). As 
a result, differences among these genes reflect the history 
of speciation events that have occurred since the eukaryotes 
began to diverge from their last common ancestor—making 
these genes well suited for inferring the root of the eukary-
otic tree. Derelle and colleagues obtained the sequences of 
these genes for 67 species of eukaryotes representing a wide 
range of eukaryotic taxa. Those sequences were then used to 
infer evolutionary relationships among the four eukaryotic 
supergroups shown in Figure 28.5.
Results
Unikonta
Excavata Excavata
SAR
Archaeplastida
Common ancestor
of all eukaryotes
Conclusion The results show that Excavata, SAR, and 
Archaeplastida form a clade, which supports the hypothesis 
that the root of the tree is located between the unikonts and 
all other eukaryotes.
Data from R. Derelle et al., Bacterial proteins pinpoint a single eukaryotic root, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 112:E693–699 (2015).
WHAT IF? Other recent evidence indicates that the root of the 
eukaryotic tree may lie between a clade that includes unikonts and 
excavates and all other eukaryotes. Draw the tree suggested by this  
result.
What is the root of the eukaryotic tree?
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   666 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 668 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  667
Entamoebas
Whereas most amoebozoans are free-living, those that belong 
to the genus Entamoeba are symbiotic parasites. They infect 
all classes of vertebrate animals as well as some invertebrates. 
Humans are host to at least six species of Entamoeba, but only 
one, E. histolytica, is known to be pathogenic. E. histolytica 
causes amoebic dysentery and is spread via contaminated 
drinking water, food, or eating utensils. Responsible for up to 
110,000 deaths worldwide every year, the disease is the third-
leading cause of death due to eukaryotic parasites, after malaria 
(see Figure 28.18) and schistosomiasis (see Figure 33.10).
Opisthokonts
Opisthokonts are an extremely diverse group of eukaryotes 
that includes animals, fungi, and several groups of protists. 
We will discuss the evolutionary history of fungi and animals 
in Chapters 31–34. Of the opisthokont protists, we will discuss 
Dictyostelium discoideum, a cellular slime mold commonly 
found on forest floors, has become a model organism for 
studying the evolution of multicellularity. One line of research 
has focused on the slime mold’s fruiting body stage. During 
this stage, the cells that form the stalk die as they dry out, 
while the spore cells at the top survive and have the potential 
to reproduce (see Figure 28.28). Scientists have found that 
mutations in a single gene can turn individual Dictyostelium 
cells into “cheaters” that never become part of the stalk. 
Because these mutants gain a strong reproductive advantage 
over noncheaters, why don’t all Dictyostelium cells cheat?
Recent discoveries suggest an answer to this question. 
Cheating cells lack a specific surface protein, and noncheat-
ing cells can recognize this difference. Noncheaters preferen-
tially aggregate with other noncheaters, thus depriving cheat-
ers of the chance to exploit them. Such a recognition system 
may have been important in the evolution of other multicel-
lular eukaryotes, such as animals and plants.
Aggregated
amoebas
Fruiting
bodies
(n)
Migrating
aggregate
Solitary amoebas
(feeding stage)
(n)
Spores
(n)
Emerging
amoeba
(n)
Amoebas
(n)
Zygote
(2n)
600 om
200 om
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
     During sexual repro-
duction, two haploid
amoebas fuse and form 
a diploid zygote.
2
     The aggregate migrates for a
while and then stops. Some of the 
cells dry up after forming a stalk that
supports a fruiting body.
     In favorable
conditions, amoebas
emerge from the 
spore coats and feed.
      Other
cells crawl
up the stalk
and develop
into spores.
      Spores
are released.
6
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
9
7
8
1
     The zygote
becomes a giant
cell by consuming
haploid amoebas
(not shown). After 
developing a
resistant wall, the
giant cell undergoes
meiosis followed by
several mitotic
divisions.
3
 4  The wall ruptures,
releasing new
haploid amoebas.
4
     When food is depleted,
hundreds of amoebas
congregate in response to a
chemical attractant and form
a slug-like aggregate 
(see photo).
5
     In the feeding stage, 
solitary haploid amoebas 
engulf bacteria; these solitary 
cells periodically divide by 
mitosis (asexual reproduction).
. Figure 28.28 The life  
cycle of Dictyostelium,  
a cellular slime mold.
VISUAL SKILLS Suppose cells were removed from the slug-like aggregate shown in the photo. Use 
the information in the life cycle to infer whether these cells would be haploid or diploid. Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   667 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 669 ===

668 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
shumwayae (see Figure 28.17), a dinoflagellate parasite that 
attaches to its victims and eats their skin. Among species that 
parasitize plants, the stramenopile Phytophthora ramorum 
(an!oomycete) has emerged as a major new forest pathogen. 
This species causes sudden oak death (SOD), a disease that 
has!killed millions of oaks and other trees in the United States 
and Great Britain (Figure 28.30; also see Concept 54.5).
Photosynthetic Protists
Many protists are important producers, organisms that 
use energy from light (or in some prokaryotes, inorganic 
chemicals) to convert CO2 to organic compounds. Producers 
form the base of ecological food webs. In aquatic communi-
ties, the main producers are photosynthetic protists and 
prokaryotes (Figure 28.31). All other organisms in the com-
munity are consumers that depend on producers for food, 
either directly (by eating them) or indirectly (by eating an 
organism that ate a producer). Scientists estimate that roughly 
30% of the world’s photosynthesis is performed by diatoms, 
dinoflagellates, multicellular algae, and other aquatic protists. 
Photosynthetic prokaryotes contribute another 20%, and 
plants are responsible for the remaining 50%.
10 om
c Figure 28.29  
A symbiotic 
protist. This 
organism is a 
hypermastigote, a 
member of a group 
of parabasalids 
that live in the gut 
of termites and 
certain cockroaches 
and enable the 
hosts to digest 
wood (SEM).
. Figure 28.30 Sudden oak death. Dead oak trees are visible in 
this landscape in Essex, England. Infected trees lose their ability to 
adjust to cycles of wet and dry weather.
1. Contrast the pseudopodia of amoebozoans and forams.
2. In what sense is “fungus animal” a fitting description of a 
slime mold? In what sense is it not fitting?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Alpha proteobacteria were used 
as the outgroup to estimate the tree shown in Figure 28.26. 
Explain why these bacteria were selected as the outgroup 
rather than other bacterial or archaeal lineages. (See Figure 
22.12 and associated text in Concept 22.3.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.5
the nucleariids in Chapter 31 because they are more closely 
related to fungi than they are to other protists. Similarly, we 
will discuss choanoflagellates in Chapter 32, since they are 
more closely related to animals than they are to other protists. 
The nucleariids and choanoflagellates illustrate why scientists 
have abandoned the former kingdom Protista: A monophy-
letic group that includes these single-celled eukaryotes would 
also have to include the multicellular animals and fungi that 
are closely related to them.
Protists play key roles in 
ecological communities
Most protists are aquatic, and they are found almost anywhere 
there is water, including moist terrestrial habitats such as 
damp soil and leaf litter. In oceans, ponds, and lakes, many 
protists are bottom-dwellers that attach to rocks and other sub-
strates or creep through the sand and silt. As we’ve seen, other 
protists are important constituents of plankton. We’ll focus 
here on two key roles that protists play in the varied habitats 
in which they live: that of symbiont and that of producer.
Symbiotic Protists
Many protists form symbiotic associations with other species. 
For example, photosynthetic dinoflagellates are food-providing 
symbiotic partners of the animals (coral polyps) that build coral 
reefs. Coral reefs are highly diverse ecological communities. 
That diversity ultimately depends on corals—and on the mutu-
alistic protists that nourish them. Corals support reef diversity 
by providing food to some species and habitat to many others.
Another example is the wood-digesting protists that inhabit 
the gut of many termite species (Figure 28.29). Unaided, ter-
mites cannot digest wood, and they rely on protistan or pro-
karyotic symbionts to do so. Termites cause over $3.5 billion 
in damage annually to wooden homes in the United States.
Symbiotic protists also include parasites that have compro-
mised the economies of entire countries. Consider the malaria-
causing protist Plasmodium: Income levels in countries hard 
hit by malaria are 33% lower than in similar countries free 
of the disease. Protists can have devastating effects on other 
species too. Massive fish kills have been attributed to Pfiesteria 
CONCEPT 28.6
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   668 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 670 ===

 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  669
Because producers form the foundation of food webs, 
factors that affect producers can dramatically affect their 
entire community. In aquatic environments, photosynthetic 
protists are often held in check by low concentrations of 
nitrogen, phosphorus, or iron. Various human actions can 
increase the concentrations of these elements in aquatic 
communities. For example, when fertilizer is applied to a 
field, some of the fertilizer may be washed by rainfall into 
a river that drains into a lake or ocean. When people add 
nutrients to aquatic communities in this or other ways, the 
abundance of photosynthetic protists can increase spectacu-
larly. Such increases can have major ecological consequences, 
including the formation of large “dead zones” in marine 
ecosystems (see Figure 56.23).
Herbivorous
plankton
Other
consumers
Carnivorous
plankton
Prokaryotic
producers
Protistan
producers
m Figure 28.31 Protists: key producers in aquatic 
communities. Arrows in this simplified food web lead from food 
sources to the organisms that eat them.
A pressing question is how global warming will affect 
photosynthetic protists and other producers. As shown in 
Figure 28.32, the growth and biomass of photosynthetic pro-
tists and prokaryotes have declined in many ocean regions as 
sea surface temperatures have increased. By what mechanism 
do rising sea surface temperatures reduce the growth of marine 
producers? One hypothesis relates to the rise or upwelling 
of cold, nutrient-rich waters from below. Many marine pro-
ducers rely on nutrients brought to the surface in this way. 
However, rising sea surface temperatures can cause the for-
mation of a layer of light, warm water that acts as a barrier to 
nutrient upwelling—thus reducing the growth of marine pro-
ducers. If sustained, the changes shown in Figure 28.32 would 
likely have far-reaching effects on marine ecosystems, fishery 
yields, and the global carbon cycle (see Figure 55.14). Global 
warming can also affect producers on land, but there the base 
of food webs is occupied not by protists but by plants, which 
we will discuss in Chapters 29 and 30.
CONCEPT CHECK 28.6
1. Justify the claim that photosynthetic protists are among the 
biosphere’s most important organisms.
2. Describe three symbioses that include protists.
3. WHAT IF? High water temperatures and pollution can 
cause corals to expel their dinoflagellate symbionts. How 
might such “coral bleaching” affect corals and other species?
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS The bacterium Wolbachia is a symbiont 
that lives in mosquito cells and spreads rapidly through mos-
quito populations. Wolbachia can make mosquitoes resistant to 
infection by Plasmodium; researchers are seeking a strain that 
confers resistance and does not harm mosquitoes. Compare 
evolutionary changes that could occur if malaria control is 
attempted using such a Wolbachia strain versus using insecti-
cides to kill mosquitoes. (Review Figure 28.18 and Concept 23.4.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
–0.02 –0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02
(b)The concentration of chlorophyll, an index for the biomass and 
growth of marine producers, has decreased over the same time 
period in most ocean regions.
(a)Researchers studied 10 ocean regions, identified with letters 
on the map [see (b) for the corresponding names]. SSTs have 
increased since 1950 in most areas of these regions.
0.00 1.25–1.25 2.50–2.50 Chlorophyll change (mg/[m2 • yr])
Arctic (A)
North Atlantic (NA)
Equatorial Atlantic (EA)
South Atlantic (SA)
North Indian (NI)
South Indian (SI)
North Pacific (NP)
Equatorial Pacific (EP)
South Pacific (SP)
Southern (S)
A NA
EA
SA
NI
SI
NP EP
SP
5ea-surface teOperature 
556 change 
ř%
S
Ocean region
. Figure 28.32 Effects of climate change on marine producers.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   669 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 671 ===

670 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
• Current evidence indicates that eukaryotes originated by endo-
symbiosis when an archaeal host (or a host closely related to the 
archaea) engulfed an alpha proteobacterium that would evolve 
into an organelle found in all eukaryotes, the mitochondrion.
• Plastids are thought to be descendants of cyanobacteria that 
were engulfed by early eukaryotic cells. The plastid-bearing lin-
eage eventually evolved into red algae and green algae. Other 
protist groups evolved from secondary  endosymbiotic events 
in which red algae or green algae were themselves engulfed.
• In one hypothesis, eukaryotes are grouped into four supergroups: 
Excavata, SAR, Archaeplastida, and Unikonta.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
28 Chapter Review
CONCEPT 28.1
Most eukaryotes are single-celled organisms (pp. 648–651)
• Domain Eukarya includes many groups of protists, along with 
plants, animals, and fungi. Unlike prokaryotes, protists and other 
eukaryotes have a nucleus and other membrane-enclosed organ-
elles, as well as a cytoskeleton that enables them to have asym-
metric forms and to change shape as they feed, move, or grow.
• Protists are structurally and functionally diverse and have a wide 
variety of life cycles. Most are unicellular. Protists include photo-
autotrophs, heterotrophs, and mixotrophs.
? Describe similarities and differences between protists and other 
eukaryotes.
Key Concept/Eukaryote Supergroup Major Groups
Key Morphological 
Characteristics Specific Examples
CONCEPT 28.2
Excavates include protists with modified 
mitochondria and protists with unique  
flagella (pp. 651–655)
? What evidence indicates that the excavates form a clade?
Diplomonads and 
parabasalids
Euglenozoans
Kinetoplastids
Euglenids
Modified mitochondria
Spiral or crystalline rod  
inside flagella
Giardia,  
Trichomonas 
Trypanosoma,  
Euglena  
CONCEPT 28.3
SAR is a highly diverse group of protists  
defined by DNA similarities (pp. 655–663)
? Although they are not photosynthetic, apicomplexan 
parasites such as Plasmodium have modified plastids. Describe 
a current hypothesis that explains this observation.
Stramenopiles
Diatoms
Oomycetes
Brown algae
Alveolates
Dinoflagellates
Apicomplexans
Ciliates
Rhizarians
Radiolarians
Forams
Cercozoans
Hairy and smooth flagella
Membrane-enclosed sacs 
(alveoli) beneath plasma 
membrane
Amoebas with threadlike 
pseudopodia
Phytophthora, 
Laminaria 
Pfiesteria,  
Plasmodium, 
Paramecium 
Globigerina
CONCEPT 28.4
Red algae and green algae are the closest 
relatives of plants (pp. 663–665)
? On what basis do systematists place plants in the same 
supergroup (Archaeplastida) as red and green algae?
Red algae 
Green algae 
 
Plants
Phycoerythrin (photosyn-
thetic pigment)
Plant-type chloroplasts
(See Chapters 29 and 30.)
Porphyridium, 
Palmaria   
Chlamydomonas, 
Ulva    
Mosses, ferns,  
conifers,  
flowering  
plants     
CONCEPT 28.5
Unikonts include protists that are closely 
related to fungi and animals (pp. 665–668)
? Describe a key feature for each of the main protist 
subgroups of Unikonta.
Amoebozoans
Tubulinids
Slime molds
Entamoebas
Opisthokonts
Amoebas with lobe-
shaped or tube-shaped 
pseudopodia
(Highly variable; see 
Chapters 31–34.)
Amoeba, Dictyostelium
Choanoflagellates, 
nucleariids,  
animals,  
fungi
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   670 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 672 ===

9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS Organisms 
interact with each other and the physical environment. In 
a short essay (100–150 words), explain how the response of 
diatom populations to a drop in nutrient availability can affect 
both other organisms and aspects of the physical environment 
(such as carbon dioxide concentrations).
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
50 om
This micrograph shows a single-celled eukaryote, the ciliate 
Didinium (left), about to engulf its Paramecium prey, which 
is also a ciliate. Identify the eukaryotic supergroup to which 
ciliates belong and describe the role of endosymbiosis in the 
evolutionary history of that supergroup. Are these ciliates 
more closely related to all other protists than they are to plants, 
fungi, or animals? Explain.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 28.6
Protists play key roles in ecological  
communities (pp. 668–669)
• Protists form mutualistic and parasitic relationships that affect their 
symbiotic partners and many other members of the community.
• Photosynthetic protists are among the most important producers 
in aquatic communities. Because they are at the base of the food 
web, factors that affect photosynthetic protists affect many other 
species in the community.
? Describe several protists that are ecologically important.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION • DRAW IT Medical researchers 
seek to develop drugs that can kill or restrict the growth of 
human pathogens yet have few harmful effects on patients. 
These drugs often work by disrupting the metabolism of the 
pathogen or by targeting its structural features.
Draw and label a phylogenetic tree that includes an 
ancestral prokaryote and the following groups of organisms: 
Excavata, SAR, Archaeplastida, Unikonta, and, within 
Unikonta, amoebozoans, animals, choanoflagellates, fungi, 
and nucleariids. Based on this tree, hypothesize whether it 
would be most difficult to develop drugs to combat human 
pathogens that are prokaryotes, protists, animals, or fungi. 
(You do not need to consider the evolution of drug resistance 
by the pathogen.)
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Applying the “If . . . then” logic of 
deductive reasoning (see Concept 1.3), what are a few of the 
predictions that arise from the hypothesis that plants evolved 
from green algae? Put another way, how could you test this 
hypothesis?
 CHAPTER 28  The Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes  671
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–6 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C28_PRF.indd   671 14/03/20   5:34 AM

=== SIDE 673 ===

Figure 29.1 For much of Earth’s history, the land surface was largely lifeless. 
Some prokaryotes lived on land 3.2 billion years ago, but it was only within the last 
500!million years that small plants, fungi, and animals joined them ashore. Finally, 
by 385 million years ago, the first forests appeared (but with different species than 
those of today).
672
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 29
• Animation: Moss Life Cycle
• Animation: Fern Life Cycle
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Visualizing the Concept: Haploid and 
Diploid Generations Alternate in Plant 
Life Cycles
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Making Bar 
Graphs and Interpreting Data
29.1 Plants evolved from green  
algae p. 673
29.2 Mosses and other nonvascular 
plants have life cycles dominated  
by gametophytes p. 677
29.3 Ferns and other seedless vascular 
plants were the first plants to  
grow tall p. 683
KEY CONCEPTS
Nonvascular and Seedless 
Vascular Plants29
Study Tip
Make a table: As you read the chapter, 
make a table of adaptations for life 
on land that evolved in plants after 
they diverged from their close aquatic 
relatives, a group of charophyte algae.
Adaptation Description
How it facilitates
life on land
Cuticle Waxy covering on
outer body surface
Reduces
dessication
What were the major developments 
in the evolution of plants?
Plants originated from green algae about 470 million years ago.
Nonvascular plants
(such as mosses)
Seedless vascular plants
(such as ferns)
Seed plants
(cone-bearing plants and 
flowering plants)
By 425 million years ago, some early plants had 
traits facilitating life on land.
Over time, early plants gave rise to a rich diversity of plants.
Reproductive structures
Photosynthetic branches
Structures that anchor
the plant to the soil
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   672 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 674 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 673
Adaptations Enabling the Move to Land
Many species of charophyte algae inhabit shallow waters 
around the edges of ponds and lakes, where they are subject 
to occasional drying. In such environments, natural selection 
favors individual algae that can survive periods when they are 
not submerged. In charophytes, a layer of a durable polymer 
called sporopollenin prevents exposed zygotes from drying 
out. A similar chemical adaptation is found in the tough spo-
ropollenin walls that encase plant spores.
The accumulation of such traits by at least one popu-
lation of charophyte algae (now extinct) enabled their 
descendants—the first plants—to live permanently above 
the waterline. This ability opened a new frontier: a terrestrial 
habitat that offered enormous benefits. The bright sunlight 
was unfiltered by water and plankton; the atmosphere offered 
more plentiful carbon dioxide than did water; and the soil by 
the water’s edge was rich in some mineral nutrients. But these 
benefits were accompanied by challenges: a relative scarcity 
of water and a lack of structural support against gravity. (To 
appreciate why such support is important, picture how the 
soft body of a jellyfish (jelly) collapses when waves strand it 
on a beach.) Plants diversified as new adaptations arose that 
enabled them to thrive despite these challenges.
Today, what adaptations are unique to plants? The 
answer depends on where you draw the boundary dividing 
plants from algae (Figure 29.4). Since the placement of this 
Plants evolved from green algae
Today, there are more than 325,000 known plant species. 
Although a few plant species returned to aquatic habitats dur-
ing their evolution, most present-day plants live on land. In 
this text, we distinguish plants from algae, which are photo-
synthetic protists.
Plants enabled other life-forms to survive on land. For 
example, plants supply oxygen and are a key source of food 
for terrestrial animals. Also, by their very presence, plants 
such as the trees of a forest physically create the habitats 
required by animals and many other organisms.
As you read in Concept 28.4, green algae called charo-
phytes are the closest relatives of plants. We’ll begin with a 
closer look at the evidence for this relationship.
Evidence of Algal Ancestry
Many key traits of plants are found in some algae. For exam-
ple, plants are multicellular, eukaryotic, photosynthetic auto-
trophs, as are brown, red, and certain green algae. Plants have 
cell walls made of cellulose, and so do green algae, dinoflagel-
lates, and brown algae. And chloroplasts with chlorophylls a 
and b are present in green algae, euglenids, and a few dinofla-
gellates, as well as in plants.
However, the charophytes are the only present-day algae 
that share certain distinctive traits with plants, suggest-
ing that they are the closest living relatives of plants. For 
example, the cells of both 
plants and charophytes 
have distinctive circular 
rings of proteins embedded 
in the plasma membrane 
(Figure!29.2); these protein 
rings synthesize the cellu-
lose found in the cell wall. 
In contrast, noncharophyte 
algae have linear sets of 
proteins that synthesize cel-
lulose. Likewise, in species of 
plants that have flagellated 
sperm, the!structure of the 
sperm closely resembles that of charophyte sperm. Analyses 
of nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial DNA also support 
the close relationship between plants and charophytes.
More specifically, a recent analysis of nearly 900 protein-
coding nuclear genes found that charophytes in the clade 
Zygnematophyceae—such as Zygnema—are the closest liv-
ing relatives of plants (Figure 29.3). Although this evidence 
shows that plants arose from within a group of charophyte 
algae, it does not mean that plants are descended from these 
living algae. Even so, present-day charophytes may tell us 
something about the algal ancestors of plants.
20 nm
. Figure 29.2 Rings of 
cellulose-synthesizing 
proteins. (inverted-contrast TEM)
CONCEPT 29.1
20 om
c Figure 29.3 Zygnema, 
 an alga closely related to 
 plants. Zygnema is a 
filamentous pond alga in the 
Zygnematophyceae, the group 
of charophytes that is most 
closely related to plants.
ANCESTRAL 
ALGA
Red algae
Chlorophytes
Other
charophytes
Closest 
charophyte 
relative
Embryophytes
Viridiplantae
Streptophyta
Plantaec Figure 29.4  
Three possible  
“plant” kingdoms,  
the clades Viridiplantae, 
Streptophyta, and Plantae.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   673 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 675 ===

674 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Alternation of Generations
Multicellular, Dependent Embryos
Charophyte algae lack the key traits of plants described in this figure: alternation of generations and the 
associated trait of multicellular, dependent embryos. As described in the main text, charophyte algae also 
lack walled spores produced in sporangia and apical meristems. This suggests that these four traits were 
absent in the ancestor common to plants and charophytes but instead evolved as derived traits of plants. 
Not every plant exhibits all of these traits: Certain lineages of plants have lost some traits over time.
As part of a life cycle with alternation of genera-
tions, multicellular plant embryos develop from 
zygotes that are retained within the tissues of the 
female parent (a gametophyte). The parental tis-
sues protect the developing embryo from harsh 
environmental conditions and provide nutrients 
such as sugars and amino acids. The embryo has 
specialized placental transfer cells that enhance the 
transfer of nutrients to the embryo through 
elaborate ingrowths of the wall surface (plasma 
membrane and cell wall). The multicellular, 
dependent embryo of plants is such a significant 
derived trait that plants are also known 
as embryophytes.
includes both multicellular haploid organisms and multicellular dip-
loid organisms. The multicellular haploid gametophyte (“gamete-
producing plant”) is named for its production by mitosis of haploid 
gametes—eggs and sperm—that fuse during fertilization, forming 
diploid zygotes. Mitotic division of the zygote produces a multicel-
lular diploid sporophyte (“spore-producing plant”). Meiosis 
in a mature sporophyte produces haploid spores, 
reproductive cells that can develop into a new 
haploid organism without fusing with 
another cell. Mitotic division of the 
spore cell produces a new multicel-
lular gametophyte, and the cycle
 begins again.
The life cycles of all plants alternate between two generations of 
distinct multicellular organisms: gametophytes and sporophytes. 
As shown in the diagram below (using a fern as an example), each 
generation gives rise to the other, a process that is called alternation 
of generations. This type of reproductive cycle evolved in various 
groups of algae but does not occur in the charophytes, the algae 
most closely related to plants. Take care not to confuse the 
alternation of generations in plants with the 
haploid and diploid stages in the life cycles 
of other sexually reproducing organisms. 
Alternation of generations is distin-
guished by the fact that the life cycle 
Mitosis Mitosis
Gamete from
another plantGametophyte
(n)
Sporophyte
(2n)
Mitosis
Gamete
Zygote
Spore
2n
n
n
n
n
MEIOSIS FERTILIZATION
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
Alternation of generations: 
five generalized steps
     The gametophyte produces
haploid gametes by mitosis.
1
     Two gametes
unite (fertilization)
and form a diploid
zygote.
2
     The zygote
develops into a
multicellular
diploid sporophyte.
3       The sporophyte
produces unicellar
haploid spores
by meiosis.
4
       The spores develop
into multicellular
haploid gametophytes.
5
Embryo
Embryo (LM) and placental transfer cell (TEM)
of Marchantia (a liverwort)
Maternal 
tissue
Wall ingrowths
Placental transfer 
cell (blue outline)10 om
2 om
10 om
2 om
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review sexual life cycles in Figure 13.6. Identify which type of sexual life 
cycle has alternation of generations, and summarize how it differs from other life cycles.
. Figure 29.5 E x p l o r i n g  A l t e r n a t i o n  o f  G e n e r a t i o n s
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   674 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 676 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 675
organs, while also providing some protection from micro-
bial attack. Most plants also have specialized pores called 
stomata (singular, stoma), which support photosynthesis 
by allowing the exchange of CO2 and O2 between the outside 
air and the plant (see Figure 11.3). Stomata are also the main 
avenues by which water evaporates from the plant; in hot, dry 
conditions, the stomata close, minimizing water loss.
The earliest plants lacked true roots and leaves. Without roots, 
how did these plants absorb nutrients from the soil? Fossils dating 
from 420 million years ago reveal an adaptation that may have 
aided early plants in nutrient uptake: They formed symbiotic 
associations with fungi. We’ll explore these associations, called 
mycorrhizae, and their benefits to both plants and fungi in more 
detail in Concept 31.1. For now, the main point is that mycorrhi-
zal fungi form extensive networks of filaments through the soil 
and transfer nutrients to their symbiotic plant partner. This ben-
efit may have helped plants without roots to colonize land.
The Origin and Diversification of Plants
The algae most closely related to plants include many unicel-
lular species and small colonial species. Since it is likely that 
the first plants were similarly small, the search for the earli-
est fossils of plants has focused on the microscopic world. As 
mentioned earlier, microorganisms colonized land as early 
as 3.2 billion years ago. But the microscopic fossils that docu-
ment life on land changed dramatically 470 million years ago 
with the appearance of spores from early plants.
What distinguishes these spores from those of algae or 
fungi? One clue comes from their chemical composition, 
which matches the composition of plant spores today but 
differs from that of the spores of other organisms. In addi-
tion, the walls of these ancient spores have  structural features 
that today are found only in the spores of certain plants 
(liverworts). And in rocks dating to 450 million years ago, 
boundary is the subject of ongoing debate, this text uses 
a traditional definition that equates the kingdom Plantae 
with embryophytes (plants with embryos). In this context, 
let’s now examine the derived traits that separate plants 
from their closest algal relatives.
Derived Traits of Plants
Several adaptations that facilitate survival and reproduction 
on dry land emerged after plants diverged from their algal 
relatives. Examples of such traits that are found in plants but 
not in charophyte algae include the following:
• Alternation of generations. This type of life cycle, 
consisting of multicellular forms that give rise to each 
other in turn, is described in Figure 29.5.
• W alled spores produced in sporangia. The sporophyte 
stage of the plant life cycle has multicellular organs called 
sporangia (singular, sporangium) that produce spores 
(Figure 29.6). The polymer sporopollenin makes the walls 
of these spores resistant to harsh environments, enabling 
plant spores to be dispersed through dry air without harm.
• Apical meristems. Plants also differ from their algal rel-
atives in having apical meristems, localized regions of 
cell division at the tips of roots and shoots (Figure 29.7). 
Apical meristem cells can divide throughout the plant’s 
life, enabling its roots and shoots to elongate, thus in-
creasing the plant’s exposure to environmental resources.
Additional derived traits that relate to terrestrial life have 
evolved in many plant species. For example, the epidermis 
in many species has a covering, the cuticle, which consists 
of wax and other polymers. Permanently exposed to the air, 
plants run a far greater risk of desiccation (drying out) than do 
their algal relatives. The cuticle acts as waterproofing, help-
ing prevent excessive water loss from the aboveground plant 
Sporangium
Longitudinal 
section of 
sporangium (LM)
Spores
Sporophyte
Gametophyte
. Figure 29.6 Sporophytes and sporangia of a moss in the 
genus Mnium. Each of the many spores produced by a sporangium 
is encased by a durable, sporopollenin-enriched wall.
Apical meristem
of shoot
Developing
leaves
100 om
b Figure 29.7 Apical 
meristem of a plant 
shoot. Cells produced 
by apical meristems 
differentiate into the outer 
epidermis, which protects 
the body, and various types 
of internal tissues, such as 
those in leaves (LM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   675 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 677 ===

676 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
(a) Fossilized spores. 
The chemical 
composition and the 
physical structure of 
the walls of these 
450-million-year-old 
spores match those 
found in certain 
plants today.
(b) Fossilized 
sporophyte tissue. 
The spores in (a) 
were embedded in 
tissue that appears 
to be from plants.
50 om
. Figure 29.8 Ancient plant spores and tissue. (colorized SEMs)
0.3 mm
c Figure 29.9 Cooksonia 
sporangium fossil. With the 
exception of the shape of its 
sporangia, Cooksonia’s overall form 
was very similar to the early plant 
shown in Figures 29.1 and 29.16.
researchers have discovered similar spores embedded in plant 
cuticle material that resembles spore-bearing tissue in living 
plants (Figure 29.8).
Fossils of larger plant structures, such as the Cooksonia 
sporangium in Figure 29.9, date to 425 million years ago, 
which is 45 million years after the appearance of plant 
spores in the fossil record. While the precise age (and form) 
of the first plants has yet to be discovered, those ances-
tral species gave rise to the vast diversity of living plants. 
Table 29.1 provides basic information about the ten extant 
phyla. (Extant lineages are those that have surviving mem-
bers.) As you read the rest of this section, look at Table 29.1 
together with Figure!29.10, which reflects a view of plant 
phylogeny that is based on plant anatomy, biochemistry, 
and genetics.
One way to distinguish groups of plants is whether or 
not they have an extensive system of vascular tissue, cells 
joined into tubes that transport water and nutrients through-
out the plant body. Most present-day plants have a complex 
vascular tissue system and are therefore called vascular 
plants. Plants that do not have an extensive transport 
system—liverworts, mosses, 
and hornworts—are described 
as “nonvascular” plants, 
even though some mosses do 
have simple vascular tissue. 
Nonvascular plants are often 
informally called bryophytes (from the Greek bryon, moss, 
and phyton, plant). Although the term bryophyte is commonly 
used to refer to all nonvascular plants, molecular studies and 
morphological analyses of sperm structure have concluded 
that bryophytes do not form a monophyletic group (a clade).
Vascular plants, which form a clade that comprises about 
93% of all extant plant species, can be categorized further 
into smaller clades. Two of these clades are the lycophytes 
(the club mosses and their relatives) and the monilophytes 
(ferns and their relatives). The plants in each of these clades 
lack seeds, which is why collectively the two clades are infor-
mally called seedless vascular plants. However, notice in 
Figure 29.10 that, like bryophytes, seedless vascular plants do 
not form a clade.
A group such as the bryophytes or the seedless vascular 
plants represents a collection of organisms that share key 
biological features. It can be informative to group organisms 
according to their features, such as having a vascular system but 
lacking seeds. But members of such a group, unlike members of 
a clade, do not necessarily share the same ancestry. For exam-
ple, even though monilophytes and lycophytes are all seedless 
vascular plants, monilophytes share a more recent common 
ancestor with seed plants. As a result, we would expect 
monilophytes and seed plants to share key traits not found in 
lycophytes—and they do, as you’ll read in!Concept 29.3.
A third clade of vascular plants consists of seed plants, 
which represent the vast majority of living plant species.  
Common Name
Number 
of Known 
Species
Nonvascular Plants (Bryophytes)
Phylum Hepatophyta Liverworts 9,000
Phylum Bryophyta Mosses 13,000
Phylum Anthocerophyta Hornworts 225
Vascular Plants
Seedless Vascular Plants
Phylum Lycophyta Lycophytes 1,200
Phylum Monilophyta Monilophytes 12,000
Seed Plants
Gymnosperms
Phylum Ginkgophyta Ginkgo 1
Phylum Cycadophyta Cycads 350
Phylum Gnetophyta Gnetophytes 75
Phylum Coniferophyta Conifers 600
Angiosperms
Phylum Anthophyta Flowering 
plants
290,000
Table 29.1 Ten Phyla of Extant Plants
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   676 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 678 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 677
ANCESTRAL
GREEN ALGA
Millions of years ago (mya)
050300350500 450 400
Origin of plants (470 mya)
Origin of vascular plants (425 mya)
Origin of seed plants 
(360 mya)
Lycophytes (club mosses,
spikemosses, quillworts)
Monilophytes (ferns,
horsetails, whisk ferns)
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
Mosses
Hornworts
Liverworts
1
2
3
Nonvascular
plants
(bryophytes)
Plants
Seedless
vascular
plants
Vascular plants
Seed plants
. Figure 29.10 Highlights of plant evolution. The phylogeny shown here illustrates a 
leading hypothesis about the relationships between plant groups.
MAKE CONNECTIONS The figure identifies which lineages are plants, nonvascular plants, vascular 
plants, seedless vascular plants, and seed plants. Which of these categories are monophyletic, and 
which are paraphyletic? Explain. (See Figure 22.10 to review these terms.)
CONCEPT CHECK 29.1
1. Why do researchers identify the charophytes rather than 
another group of algae as the closest living relatives of plants?
2. Identify four derived traits that distinguish plants from cha-
rophyte green algae and facilitate life on land. Explain.
3. WHAT IF? What would the human life cycle be like if we had 
alternation of generations? Assume that the multicellular 
diploid stage would be similar in form to an adult human.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
A seed is an embryo packaged with a supply of nutrients 
inside a protective coat. Seed plants can be divided into two 
groups, gymnosperms and angiosperms, based on the absence 
or presence of enclosed chambers in which seeds mature. 
Gymnosperms (from the Greek gymnos, naked, and sperm, 
seed) are known as “naked seed” plants because their seeds 
are not enclosed in chambers. Living gymnosperm species, 
the most familiar of which are the conifers, form a clade. 
Angiosperms (from the Greek angion, container) are a huge 
clade consisting of all flowering plants; their seeds develop 
inside chambers that originate within flowers. Nearly 90%  
of living plant species are angiosperms.
Note that the phylogeny depicted in Figure 29.10 focuses 
only on the relationships between extant plant lineages. 
Paleobotanists have also discovered fossils belonging to 
extinct plant lineages. As you’ll read later in the chapter, 
these fossils can reveal intermediate steps in the emergence  
of plant groups found on Earth today.
Mosses and other nonvascular 
plants have life cycles dominated 
by gametophytes
The nonvascular plants 
(bryophytes) are rep-
resented today by 
three phyla of small, 
herbaceous (nonwoody) plants: liverworts (phylum 
Hepatophyta), mosses (phylum Bryophyta), and 
hornworts (phylum Anthocerophyta). Liverworts and 
hornworts are named for their shapes, plus the suffix wort 
(from the Anglo-Saxon for “herb”). Mosses are familiar 
to many people, although some plants commonly called 
“mosses” are not really mosses at all. These include Irish 
moss (a red seaweed), reindeer moss (a!lichen), club mosses 
(seedless vascular plants), and Spanish!mosses (lichens in 
some regions and flowering plants in others).
Phylogenetic analyses indicate that liverworts, mosses, 
and hornworts diverged from other plant lineages early 
in the history of plant evolution (see Figure 29.10). Fossil 
evidence provides some support for this idea: The earli-
est spores of plants (dating from 450 to 470 million years 
ago) have structural features found only in the spores of 
CONCEPT 29.2
Nonvascular plants (bryophytes)
Seedless vascular plants
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   677 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 679 ===

678 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Bryophyte Gametophytes
Unlike vascular plants, in all three bryophyte phyla the 
haploid gametophytes are the dominant stage of the life 
cycle: They are usually larger and longer-living than the 
sporophytes, as shown in the moss life cycle in Figure 29.11. 
The sporophytes are typically present only part of the time.
FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS
     Spores 
develop into
threadlike 
protonemata.
1
     The haploid protonemata 
produce ”buds” that divide
by mitosis and grow into
gametophytes. 
2
     Sperm must
swim through a
film of moisture
to reach the egg.
3
 5  The sporophyte grows a
long stalk (seta) that emerges
from the archegonium.
5
 4  The zygote
develops into a 
sporophyte embryo.
4
   Attached by its foot, the 
sporophyte remains nutritionally 
dependent on the gametophyte.
6
   Meiosis occurs and haploid
spores develop in the capsule.
When the capsule is mature,
its lid pops off, and the spores
are released.
7
”Bud”
”Bud”
Protonemata
(n)
(within archegonium)
Archegonium
Zygote
(2n)
Sperm
Antheridia
Male
gametophyte
(n)
Female
gametophyte
(n)
Female
gametophytes
Rhizoid
Egg
Foot
Capsule
(sporangium)
Peristome
Spore
dispersal
Sporangium
Spores
Mature
sporophytes
Seta
Archegonia
Embryo
Young 
sporophyte
(2n)
Capsule (LM)
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
2 mm
. Figure 29.11 The life cycle of a moss.
VISUAL SKILLS In this diagram, does the sperm cell that fertilizes the egg cell differ genetically 
from the egg? Explain.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Moss 
Life Cycle
liverworts, and by 430 million years ago spores similar 
to those of mosses and hornworts also occur in the fossil 
record. The earliest fossils of vascular plants date to about 
425 million years ago.
Over the long course of their evolution, liverworts, mosses, 
and hornworts have acquired many unique adaptations. 
Next, we’ll examine some of those features.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   678 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 680 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 679
c Figure 29.12 A moss brood body.When bryophyte spores are dispersed to a favorable 
habitat, such as moist soil or tree bark, they may 
germinate and grow into gametophytes. Germinating 
moss spores, for example, characteristically produce a 
mass of green, branched, one-cell-thick filaments known 
as a protonema (plural, protonemata). A protonema has 
a large surface area that enhances absorption of water and 
minerals. In favorable conditions, a protonema produces 
one or more “buds,” each of which develops into a moss 
gametophyte. (Note that when referring to nonvascular 
plants, we often use quotation marks for structures similar 
to the buds, stems, and leaves of vascular plants because 
the definitions of these terms are based on vascular  
plant organs.)
Bryophyte gametophytes generally form ground-hugging 
carpets, partly because their body parts are too thin to sup-
port a tall plant. A second constraint on the height of many 
bryophytes is the absence of vascular tissue, which would 
enable long-distance transport of water and nutrients. (The 
thin structure of bryophyte organs makes it possible to 
distribute materials for short distances without specialized 
vascular tissue.) However, some mosses have conducting 
tissues in the center of their “stems.” A few of these mosses 
can grow as tall as 60 cm (2 feet) as a result. Phylogenetic 
analyses suggest that conducting tissues similar to those of 
vascular plants arose independently in these mosses by con-
vergent evolution.
The gametophytes are anchored to the ground by delicate 
rhizoids, which are long, tubular single cells (in liverworts 
and hornworts) or filaments of cells (in mosses). Unlike roots, 
which are found in vascular plant sporophytes, rhizoids lack 
specialized conducting cells and do not play a primary role in 
water and mineral absorption.
Gametophytes can form multiple gametangia, 
multicellular structures that produce gametes and are 
covered by protective tissue. Female gametangia are 
called archegonia, and male gametangia are called 
antheridia. Each archegonium produces one egg, 
whereas each antheridium produces many sperm. Some 
bryophyte gametophytes are bisexual, but in mosses the 
archegonia and antheridia are typically carried on sepa -
rate female and male gametophytes. Flagellated sperm 
swim through a film of water toward eggs, entering the 
archegonia in response to chemical attractants. Eggs are 
not released but instead remain within the bases of arche -
gonia. After fertilization, embryos are retained within 
the archegonia. Layers of placental transfer cells help 
transport nutrients to the embryos as they develop into 
sporophytes.
Bryophyte sperm typically require a film of water to 
reach the eggs. Given this requirement, it is not surprising 
that many bryophyte species are found in 
moist habitats. The fact that sperm swim 
through water to reach the egg also means 
that in species with separate male and female 
gametophytes (most species of mosses), 
sexual reproduction is likely to be!more 
successful when individuals are located close 
to one another.
Many bryophyte species can increase the 
number of individuals in a local area through various meth-
ods of asexual reproduction. For example, some mosses repro-
duce asexually by forming brood bodies, small!plantlets that 
detach from the parent plant and grow into new, genetically 
identical copies of their parent (Figure!29.12).
Bryophyte Sporophytes
The cells of bryophyte sporophytes contain plastids that are 
usually green and photosynthetic when the sporophytes 
are young. Even so, bryophyte sporophytes cannot live 
independently. A bryophyte sporophyte remains attached 
to its parental gametophyte throughout the sporophyte’s 
lifetime, dependent on the gametophyte for supplies of sug-
ars, amino acids, minerals, and water.
Bryophytes have the smallest sporophytes of all 
extant plant groups. A typical bryophyte sporophyte 
consists of a foot, a seta, and a sporangium. Embedded 
in the archegonium, the foot absorbs nutrients from the 
gametophyte. The seta (plural, setae), or stalk, conducts these 
materials to the sporangium, also called a capsule, which 
produces spores by meiosis.
Bryophyte sporophytes can produce enormous numbers 
of spores. A single moss capsule, for example, can generate 
over 5 million spores. In most mosses, the seta becomes elon-
gated, enhancing spore dispersal by elevating the capsule. 
Typically, the upper part of the capsule features a ring of 
interlocking, tooth-like structures known as the peristome 
(see Figure 29.11). These “teeth” open under dry conditions 
and close again when it is moist. This allows moss spores to be 
discharged gradually, via periodic gusts of wind that can carry 
them long distances.
Moss and hornwort sporophytes are often larger and more 
complex than those of liverworts. For example, hornwort 
sporophytes, which superficially resemble grass blades, have a 
cuticle. Moss and hornwort sporophytes also have stomata, as 
do all vascular plants (but not liverworts).
Figure 29.13 shows some examples of gametophytes and 
sporophytes in the bryophyte phyla.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   679 14/03/20   3:53 AM

=== SIDE 681 ===

680 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Foot
Female gametangia
(elevated on stalks)
Sporophyte
Thallus
Gametophytes of Marchantia 
polymorpha, a "thalloid" liverwort
Marchantia sporophyte (LM)
Seta
Capsule
(sporangium)
500 om
Plagiochila
deltoidea,
a ”leafy”
liverwort
Sporophyte
Gametophyte
An Anthoceros
hornwort species
This phylum’s common and scientiﬁc names (from the Latin 
hepaticus, liver) refer to the liver-shaped gametophytes of its 
members, such as Marchantia, shown below. In medieval times, 
their shape was thought to be a sign that the plants could help
treat liver diseases. Some liverworts, including Marchantia, are 
described as “thalloid” because of the ﬂattened shape of their 
gametophytes. Marchantia gametangia are elevated on stalks that 
look like miniature trees. You would need a magnifying glass to see 
the sporophytes, which have a short seta (stalk) with an oval or 
round capsule. Other liverworts, such as Plagiochila, below, are called 
“leafy” because their stemlike gametophytes have many leaﬂike 
appendages. There are many more species of leafy liverworts than 
thalloid liverworts.
Liverworts (Phylum Hepatophyta)
This phylum’s common and scientiﬁc names (from the Greek 
keras, horn) refer to the long, tapered shape of the sporophyte. A 
typical sporophyte can grow to about 5 cm high. Unlike a liver-
wort or moss sporophyte, a hornwort sporophyte lacks a seta and 
consists only of a sporangium. The sporangium releases mature 
spores by splitting open, starting at the tip of the horn. The game-
tophytes, which are usually 1–2 cm in diameter, grow mostly hori-
zontally and often have multiple sporophytes attached. Hornworts 
are frequently among the ﬁrst species to colonize open areas with 
moist soils; a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-ﬁxing cyanobac-
teria contributes to their ability to do this (nitrogen is often in 
short supply in such areas).
Hornworts (Phylum Anthocerophyta)
Moss gametophytes, which range in height from less than 1 mm 
to 60 cm, are less than 15 cm tall in most species. The familiar carpet 
of moss you observe consists mainly of gametophytes. The blades of 
their “leaves” are usually only one cell thick, but more complex 
“leaves” that have ridges coated with cuticle can be found on the 
common hairy-cap moss (Polytrichum) and its close relatives. 
Moss sporophytes are typically elongated and visible to the naked 
eye, with heights ranging up to about 20 cm. Though green and 
photosynthetic when young, they turn tan or brownish red when 
ready to release spores.
Mosses (Phylum Bryophyta)
Dicranum polysetum,
rugose fork-moss
Capsule
Seta
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
(a sturdy
plant that
takes months
to grow)
. Figure 29.13  Exploring Bryophyte Diversity
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   680 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 682 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 681
Field Study Tropical lowland forests are poor in 
bryophytes. Higher up on the mountains, however, in 
so-called mossy forests or cloud forests (because they 
are often shrouded in clouds), the soil, tree trunks, and 
branches are all laden with bryophytes due to lower 
temperatures and higher moisture. The tree-dwelling 
bryophytes as well as other plants and lichens are called 
epiphytes. An example of a mossy forest on a tropical 
mountain is shown below. Tamás Pócs, a Hungarian bota -
nist with much field experience in the tropics, studied 
the epiphytic biomass and its water-holding capacity in 
the mossy forests on the Uluguru Mountains in south -
eastern Tanzania, Africa.
Results In the mossy forests on the Uluguru Mountains, 
the total epiphyte mass was found to be approximately 13.7 
tonnes dry weight per hectare. The epiphytic bryophytes alone 
were able to absorb nearly 30,000 L (30 tonnes) of water per 
hectare during a single rain after a relatively dry period.
Conclusion The thick bryophyte cover on the trees and soil 
acts as a giant sponge to significantly alleviate the effect of 
torrential tropical rains, considerably reducing soil erosion, 
occurrence of landslides, and leaching of nutrients on the 
mountain slopes. The bryophytes allow the water to filter 
gradually to the soil, and they regulate the level of agricultur-
ally important watercourses.
Data from T. Pócs, Tropical forest bryophytes, in A. J. E. Smith (editor), Bryophyte 
Ecology, 59–104 (Chapman & Hall, 1982).
WHAT IF? The mountain slopes below mossy forests are often in 
agricultural use—for example, as coffee plantations. What would 
happen to these plantations if the mossy forests were felled?
. Figure 29.14 Inquiry
Can bryophytes help prevent landslides on  
tropical mountains?
The Ecological and Economic Importance  
of Mosses
Wind dispersal of lightweight spores has distributed mosses 
throughout the world. These plants are particularly com-
mon and diverse in moist forests and wetlands. Some mosses 
colonize bare, sandy soil, where, researchers have found, 
they help retain nitrogen in the soil. In northern coniferous 
forests, species such as the feather moss Pleurozium harbor 
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria that increase the availability of 
nitrogen in the ecosystem. Other mosses inhabit such extreme 
environments as mountaintops, tundra, and deserts. Many 
mosses are able to live in very cold or dry habitats because 
they can survive the loss of most of their body water, then 
rehydrate when moisture is available. Few vascular plants can 
survive the same degree of desiccation. Moreover, phenolic 
compounds in moss cell walls absorb damaging levels of UV 
radiation present in deserts or at high!altitudes.
One wetland moss genus, Sphagnum, or peat moss, is 
often a major component of deposits of partially decayed 
organic material known as peat (Figure 29.15a). Boggy 
regions with thick layers of peat are called peatlands. 
Sphagnum does not decay readily, in part because of pheno-
lic compounds embedded in its cell walls. The low tempera-
ture, pH, and oxygen level of peatlands also inhibit decay 
of moss and other organisms in these boggy wetlands. As 
a result, some peatlands have preserved corpses for thou-
sands of years (Figure 29.15b).
Peat has long been a fuel source in Europe and Asia,  
and it is still harvested for fuel today, notably in Ireland and  
(a) Peat being harvested from a peatland
(b) ”Tollund Man,” a bog mummy dating from 405–100 BCE. 
The acidic, oxygen-poor conditions produced by Sphagnum can 
preserve human or other animal bodies for thousands of years.
. Figure 29.15 Sphagnum, or peat moss: a bryophyte with 
economic, ecological, and archaeological significance.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   681 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 683 ===

682 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Canada. Peat moss is also useful as a soil conditioner and 
for packing plant roots during shipment because it has 
large dead!cells that can absorb roughly 20 times the moss’s 
weight in water.
Peatlands cover just 3% of Earth’s land surface but contain 
one-third of the world’s soil carbon: Globally, an estimated 
500 billion tons of organic carbon is stored as peat. Current 
overharvesting of Sphagnum—primarily for use in peat-fired 
power stations—contributes to global warming by releasing 
stored CO2. In addition, if global temperatures continue to 
Could Nonvascular Plants Have Caused Weathering of 
Rocks and Contributed to Climate Change During the 
Ordovician Period? The oldest traces of terrestrial plants are 
fossilized spores formed 470 million years ago. Between that 
time and the end of the Ordovician period 444 million years 
ago, the atmospheric CO2 level dropped by half, and the climate 
cooled dramatically.
One possible cause of the drop in CO2 during the Ordovician 
period is the breakdown, or weathering, of rock. As rock 
weathers, calcium silicate (Ca2SiCO3) is released and combines 
with CO2 from the air, producing calcium carbonate (CaCO3). 
Today, the roots of vascular plants increase rock weathering 
and mineral release by producing acids that break down rock 
and soil. Although nonvascular plants lack roots, they require 
the same mineral nutrients as vascular plants. Could nonvascu-
lar plants also increase the chemical weathering of rock? If so, 
they could have contributed to the decline in atmospheric CO2 
during the Ordovician. In this exercise, you will interpret data 
from a study of the effects of moss on releasing minerals from 
two types of rock.
How the Experiment Was Done The researchers set up ex-
perimental and control microcosms, or small artificial ecosys-
tems, to measure mineral release from rocks. First, they placed 
rock fragments of volcanic origin, either granite or andesite, 
into small glass containers. Then they mixed water and macer-
ated (chopped and crushed) moss of the species Physcomitrella 
patens. They added this mixture to the experimental microcosms 
(72!granite and 41!andesite). For the control microcosms 
(77!granite and 37 andesite), they 
filtered out the moss and just added 
the water. After 130 days, they 
measured the amounts of vari-
ous minerals found in the water in 
the control microcosms and in the 
water and moss in the experimental 
microcosms.
Data from the Experiment The 
moss grew (increased its biomass) 
in the experimental microcosms. 
The table shows the mean amounts 
in micromoles (µmol) of several 
minerals measured in the water and 
the moss in the microcosms.
Making Bar Graphs and Interpreting Data
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. Why did the researchers 
add filtrate from which 
macerated moss had been 
removed to the control 
microcosms?
2. Make two bar graphs (for granite and andesite) comparing 
the mean amounts of each element weathered from rocks in 
the control and experimental microcosms. (Hint: For an ex-
perimental microcosm, what sum represents the total amount 
weathered from rocks?) (For additional information on bar 
graphs, see the Scientific Skills Review in Appendix D.)
3. Overall, what is the effect of moss on chemical weathering 
of rock? Are the results similar or different for granite and 
andesite?
4. Based on their experimental results, the researchers added 
weathering of rock by nonvascular plants to simulation models 
of the Ordovician climate. The new models predicted decreased 
CO2 levels and global cooling sufficient to produce the glacia-
tions in the late Ordovician period. What assumptions did the re-
searchers make in using results from their experiments in climate 
simulation models?
5. “Life has profoundly changed the Earth.” Explain whether or 
not these experimental results support this statement.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Ca2+(mmol) Mg2+(mmol) K+(mmol)
Granite Andesite Granite Andesite Granite Andesite
Mean weathered amount 
released in water in the 
control microcosms
1.68 1.54 0.42 0.13 0.68 0.60
Mean weathered amount 
released in water in the 
experimental microcosms
1.27 1.84 0.34 0.13 0.65 0.64
Mean weathered amount 
taken up by moss in the 
experimental microcosms
1.09 3.62 0.31 0.56 1.07 0.28
Data from T. M. Lenton et al., First plants cooled the Ordovician, Nature Geoscience 5:86–89 (2012).
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
rise, the water levels of some peatlands are expected to drop. 
Such a change would expose peat to air and cause it to decom-
pose, thereby releasing additional stored CO2 and contribut-
ing further to global warming. The!historical and expected 
future effects of Sphagnum on the global climate underscore 
the importance of preserving and managing peatlands.
Mosses may have a long history of affecting climate change. 
In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you will explore the question 
of whether they did so during the Ordovician period by con-
tributing to the weathering of rocks.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   682 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 684 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 683
Ferns and other seedless  
vascular plants were the first 
plants to grow tall
During the first 100 million 
years of plant evolution, 
bryophytes were prominent 
types of vegetation. But it is 
vascular plants that dominate most landscapes today. The 
earliest fossils of vascular plants date to 425 million years ago. 
These plants lacked seeds but had well-developed vascular 
systems, an evolutionary novelty that set the stage for vascu-
lar plants to grow taller than their bryophyte counterparts. 
As in bryophytes, however, the sperm of ferns and all other 
seedless vascular plants are flagellated and swim through a 
film of water to reach eggs. In part because of these swimming 
sperm, seedless vascular plants today are most common in 
damp environments.
Origins and Traits of Vascular Plants
Unlike the nonvascular plants, ancient relatives of vas-
cular plants had branched sporophytes that were not 
dependent on gametophytes for nutrition (Figure 29.16). 
Although these early plants were less than 20 cm tall,  
their branching enabled their bodies to become more 
complex and to have multiple sporangia. As plant bod-
ies became more complex over time, competition for 
space and sunlight probably increased. As we’ll see, that 
competition may have stimulated still more evolution in 
vascular plants, eventually leading to the formation of the 
first forests.
Early vascular plants had some derived traits of today’s 
vascular plants, but they lacked roots and some other adapta-
tions that evolved later. The main traits that characterize liv-
ing vascular plants are life cycles with dominant sporophytes, 
transport in vascular tissues called xylem and phloem, and 
well-developed roots and leaves, including spore-bearing 
leaves called sporophylls.
CONCEPT 29.3
Nonvascular plants (bryophytes)
Seedless vascular plants
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
CONCEPT CHECK 29.2
1. How do bryophytes differ from other plants?
2. Explain why many bryophytes require a moist habitat to 
survive.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the discussion of feedback 
regulation in Concept 1.1. Could effects of global warming 
on peatlands alter CO2 concentrations in ways that result in 
negative or positive feedback? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Life Cycles with Dominant Sporophytes
As mentioned earlier, mosses and other bryophytes have life 
cycles dominated by gametophytes (see Figure 29.11). Fossil 
evidence suggests that a change began to develop in some of the 
earliest vascular plants, whose gametophytes and sporophytes 
were about equal in size. Further reductions in gametophyte size 
occurred among extant vascular plants; in these groups, the spo-
rophyte generation is the larger and more complex form in the 
alternation of generations (Figure 29.17). In ferns, for example, 
the familiar leafy plants are the sporophytes. You would have to 
get down on your hands and knees and search the ground care-
fully to find fern gametophytes, which are tiny structures that 
often grow on or just below the soil surface.
Transport in Xylem and Phloem
Vascular plants have two types of vascular tissue: xylem and 
phloem (see Figure 35.10). Xylem conducts most of the 
water and minerals. The xylem of all vascular plants includes 
tracheids, tube-shaped cells that carry water and minerals 
up from the roots. The water-conducting cells of the xylem 
are dead at functional maturity and are lignified; that is, their 
cell walls are strengthened by the polymer lignin. The tissue 
called phloem has cells arranged into tubes that distribute 
sugars, amino acids, and other organic products; these cells are 
alive at functional maturity.
Sporangia
Rhizoids
Fossilized stoma
25 om
2 cm
. Figure 29.16 Sporophytes of Aglaophyton major, an 
ancient relative of living vascular plants. This reconstruction 
from 405-million-year-old fossils exhibits dichotomous (Y-shaped) 
branching with sporangia at the ends of branches. Sporophyte 
branching characterizes living vascular plants but is lacking in living 
nonvascular plants (bryophytes). Aglaophyton had structures called 
rhizoids that anchored it to the ground. The inset shows a fossilized 
stoma of A. major (colorized LM).
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   683 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 685 ===

684 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
 Mastering Biology Animation: Fern Life Cycle
WHAT IF? If the ability to disperse 
sperm by wind evolved in a fern, how 
might its life cycle be affected?
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
Spore
(n)Spore
dispersal
Young
gametophyte
Underside
of mature
gametophyte
(n)
Antheridium
Rhizoid
Sperm
New
sporophyte
Mature
sporophyte
(2n)
Sporangium
Sporangium
Gametophyte
Fiddlehead (young leaf)
Egg
Zygote
(2n)
Archegonium
Sorus
FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS
Key
      Sporangia release spores.
Most fern species produce a single
type of spore that develops into a
bisexual photosynthetic gametophyte.
1 2
      Sperm use flagella
to swim to eggs in the
archegonia. An attractant
secreted by archegonia
helps direct the sperm.
3
      On the underside
of the sporophyte‘s
reproductive leaves
are spots called sori.
Each sorus is a
cluster of sporangia.
5
      A zygote develops into a new sporophyte,
and the young plant grows out from an
archegonium of its parent, the gametophyte.
4
      Each gametophyte develops sperm-producing 
organs called antheridia and egg-producing 
organs called archegonia. Although this 
simplified diagram shows a sperm fertilizing an 
egg from the same gametophyte, in most fern 
species a gametophyte produces sperm and eggs 
at different times. Therefore, typically an egg 
from one gametophyte is fertilized by a sperm 
from another gametophyte.
. Figure 29.17 The life cycle of 
a fern.
Lignified vascular tissue helped enable vascular plants to 
grow tall. Their stems became strong enough to provide sup-
port against gravity, and they could transport water and min-
eral nutrients high above the ground. Tall plants could also 
outcompete short plants for access to the sunlight!needed for 
photosynthesis. In addition, the spores of tall plants could 
disperse farther than those of short plants,!enabling tall spe-
cies to colonize new environments more rapidly. Overall, the 
ability to grow tall gave vascular plants a competitive edge 
over nonvascular plants, which typically are less than 5 cm 
in height. Over time, competition among vascular plants also 
would have increased, leading to selection for taller growth 
forms—a process that eventually gave rise to the trees that 
formed the first forests 385 million years ago.
Evolution of Roots
Vascular tissue also provides benefits below ground. Instead of 
the rhizoids seen in bryophytes, roots evolved in the sporophytes 
of almost all vascular plants. Roots are organs that absorb water 
and nutrients from the soil. Roots also anchor vascular plants to 
the ground, hence allowing the shoot system to grow taller.
Root tissues of living plants closely resemble stem tissues 
of early vascular plants preserved in fossils. This suggests that 
roots may have evolved from the lowest belowground por-
tions of stems in ancient vascular plants. It is unclear whether 
roots evolved only once in the common ancestor of all vas-
cular plants or independently in different lineages. Although 
the roots of living members of these lineages of vascular 
plants share many similarities, fossil evidence hints at conver-
gent evolution. The oldest fossils of lycophytes, for example, 
already displayed simple roots 400 million years ago, when 
the ancestors of ferns and seed plants still had none. Studying 
genes that control root development in different vascular 
plant species may help resolve this question.
Evolution of Leaves
Leaves are structures that serve as the primary photo-
synthetic organ of vascular plants. In terms of size and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   684 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 686 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 685
megasporophylls and microsporophylls. Megasporophylls 
have megasporangia, which produce megaspores, spores 
that develop into female gametophytes. Microsporophylls 
have microsporangia, which produce microspores, smaller 
spores that develop into male gametophytes. All seed plants 
and a few seedless vascular plants are heterosporous. The fol-
lowing diagram compares the two conditions:
complexity, leaves can be classified as either microphylls or 
megaphylls (Figure 29.18). All of the lycophytes—and only 
the lycophytes—have microphylls, which are small, often 
spine-shaped leaves supported by a single strand of vascular 
tissue. Almost all other vascular plants have megaphylls, 
leaves with a highly branched vascular system; a few spe-
cies have reduced leaves that appear to have evolved from 
megaphylls. Megaphylls are typically larger than microphylls 
and therefore support greater photosynthetic productivity 
than microphylls. Microphylls first appear in the fossil record 
410!million years ago, but megaphylls do not emerge until 
370 million years ago, toward the end of the Devonian period.
Sporophylls and Spore Variations
One milestone in the evolution of plants was the emer-
gence of sporophylls, modified leaves that bear sporangia. 
Sporophylls vary greatly in structure. For example, fern 
sporophylls produce clusters of sporangia known as sori 
(singular, sorus), usually on the undersides of the sporophylls 
(see Figure 29.17). In many lycophytes and in most gymno-
sperms, groups of sporophylls form cone-like structures called 
strobili (singular, strobilus). The sporophylls of angiosperms 
are called carpels and stamens (see Figure 30.8).
Most seedless vascular plant species are homosporous: 
They have one type of sporophyll bearing one type of sporan-
gium that produces one type of spore, which typically devel-
ops into a bisexual gametophyte, as in most ferns. In contrast, 
a heterosporous species has two types of sporophylls, called 
Microphyll leaves
Megaphyll leaves
Selaginella kraussiana
(Krauss’s spikemoss)
Hymenophyllum tunbrigense
(Tunbridge filmy fern)
Microphylls
Unbranched
vascular tissue
Megaphylls
Branched
vascular
tissue
. Figure 29.18 Microphyll and megaphyll leaves.
Homosporous spore production
(most seedless vascular plants)
Sporangium
on sporophyll
Heterosporous spore production
(all seed plants)
Megaspore Female
gametophyte
Male
gametophyteMicrospore
Single
type of spore
Typically a
bisexual
gametophyte
Eggs
Sperm
Eggs
Sperm
Megasporangium
on megasporophyll
Microsporangium
on microsporophyll
Classification of Seedless Vascular Plants
As we noted earlier, biologists recognize two clades of 
living seedless vascular plants: the lycophytes (phylum 
Lycophyta) and the monilophytes (phylum Monilophyta). 
The lycophytes include the club mosses, the spikemosses, 
and the quillworts. The monilophytes include the ferns, 
the horsetails, and the whisk ferns and their relatives. 
Although ferns, horsetails, and whisk ferns differ greatly in 
appearance, recent anatomical and molecular comparisons 
provide convincing evidence that these three groups make 
up a clade. Accordingly, many systematists now classify 
them together as the phylum Monilophyta, as we do in 
this chapter. Others refer to these groups as three separate 
phyla within a clade. Figure 29.19 describes the two main 
groups of seedless vascular plants.
Phylum Lycophyta: Club Mosses, Spikemosses,  
and Quillworts
Present-day species of lycophytes are relicts of a far more  
impressive past. By the Carboniferous period (359–299!million 
years ago), the lycophyte evolutionary lineage included 
small herbaceous plants and giant trees with diameters of 
more than 2 m and heights of more than 40!m. The giant 
lycophyte trees thrived for millions of years in moist swamps, 
but their diversity declined when Earth’s climate became 
drier during the Permian period (299–252 million years ago). 
The small lycophytes survived, represented today by about 
1,200!species. Though some are commonly called club mosses 
and spikemosses, they are not true mosses (which, as dis-
cussed earlier, are nonvascular plants).
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   685 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 687 ===

686 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
2.5 cm
1 cm
Lycophytes (Phylum Lycophyta)
Monilophytes (Phylum Monilophyta)
Many lycophytes grow on tropical trees 
as epiphytes, plants that use other plants as 
a!substrate but are not parasites. Other 
species grow on temperate forest floors. 
In some species, the tiny gametophytes 
live above ground and are photosynthetic. 
Others live below ground, nurtured by 
symbiotic fungi.
    Sporophytes have upright stems with 
many small leaves, as well as ground-
hugging stems that produce dichotomously 
branching roots. Spikemosses are usually 
relatively small and often grow horizon-
tally. In many club mosses and spikemosses, 
sporophylls are clustered into club-shaped 
cones (strobili). Quillworts, named for 
their leaf shape, form a single genus whose 
members live in marshy areas or as 
submerged aquatic plants. Club!mosses are 
all homosporous, whereas spikemosses
and quillworts are all heterosporous. The 
spores of club mosses are released in clouds 
and are so rich in oil that magicians and 
photographers once ignited them to create 
smoke or flashes of light.
Unlike the lycophytes, ferns have mega-
phylls (see Figure 29.18). The sporophytes 
typically have horizontal stems that give 
rise to large leaves called fronds, often 
divided into leaflets. A frond grows as its 
coiled tip, the fiddlehead, unfurls.
     Almost all species are homosporous. The 
gametophyte in some species shrivels and 
dies after the young sporophyte detaches 
itself. In most species, sporophytes have 
stalked sporangia with springlike devices 
that catapult spores several meters. Air-
borne spores can be carried far from their 
origin. Some species produce more than a 
trillion spores in a plant’s lifetime.
The group’s name refers to the brushy ap-
pearance of the stems, which have a gritty 
texture that made them historically useful 
as “scouring rushes” for pots and pans. 
Some species have separate fertile (cone-
bearing) and vegetative stems. Horsetails 
are homosporous, with cones releasing 
spores that typically give rise to bisexual 
gametophytes.
     Horsetails are also called arthrophytes 
(“jointed plants”) because their stems have 
joints. Rings of small leaves or branches 
emerge from each joint, but the stem is 
the!main photosynthetic organ. Large air 
canals carry oxygen to the roots, which 
often grow in waterlogged soil.
Like primitive vascular plant fossils, the 
sporophytes of whisk ferns (genus Psilotum) 
have dichotomously branching stems but 
no roots. Stems have scalelike outgrowths 
that lack vascular tissue and may have 
resulted from the evolutionary reduction of 
leaves. Each yellow knob on a stem consists 
of three fused sporangia. Species of!the 
genus Tmesipteris closely related to whisk 
ferns and found only in the South Pacific, 
also lack roots but have small, leaflike 
outgrowths in their stems, giving them a 
vine-like appearance. Both genera are homo-
sporous, with spores giving rise to bisexual 
gametophytes that grow underground and 
are only about a centimeter long.
Selaginella
moellendorffii,
a spikemoss
Strobili
(clusters of
sporophylls)
Diphasiastrum tristachyum, a club moss
Isoetes
gunnii,
a quillwort
Matteuccia
struthiopteris 
(ostrich fern)
Equisetum
telmateia,
giant
horsetail
Vegetative stem
Strobilus on
fertile stem3 cm
2.5 cm
4 cm
Psilotum
nudum,
a whisk
fern
Ferns Horsetails Whisk Ferns and Relatives
. Figure 29.19 E x p l o r i n g  S e e d l e s s  V a s c u l a r  P l a n t  D i v e r s i t y
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   686 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 688 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 687
One major effect was that early forests contributed to a 
large drop in CO2 levels during the Carboniferous period, 
causing global cooling that resulted in widespread glacier 
formation. The trees of early forests contributed to this 
drop in CO2 levels in part by the actions of their roots. 
The roots of vascular plants secrete acids that break down 
rocks, thereby increasing the rate at which calcium and 
magnesium are released from rocks into the soil. These 
chemicals react with carbon dioxide dissolved in rain 
water, forming compounds that ultimately wash into the 
oceans, where they are incorporated into rocks (calcium 
or magnesium carbonates). The net effect of these 
processes—which were accelerated by plants—is that CO2 
removed from the air is stored in marine rocks. Although 
carbon stored in these rocks can be returned to the atmo -
sphere, it typically takes millions of years for this to occur 
(as when geological uplift brings the rocks to the surface, 
exposing them to erosion).
In addition, the seedless vascular plants that formed  
the first forests eventually became coal, again removing 
CO2 from the atmosphere for long periods of time. In the 
stagnant waters of Carboniferous swamps, the dead bod -
ies of early trees did not completely decay. This organic 
material turned to thick layers of peat, later covered by 
the sea. Marine sediments piled on top, and over millions 
of years, heat and pressure converted the peat to coal. In 
fact, Carboniferous coal deposits are the most extensive 
ever formed. Coal was crucial to the Industrial Revolution, 
and people worldwide still burn 6 billion tons a year. It is 
ironic that coal, formed from plants that contributed to 
Phylum Monilophyta: Ferns, Horsetails,  
and Whisk Ferns and Relatives
Ferns radiated extensively from their Devonian origins and 
grew alongside lycophyte trees and horsetails in the great 
Carboniferous swamp forests. Today, ferns are by far the 
most widespread seedless vascular plants, numbering more 
than 12,000 species. Though most diverse in the tropics, 
many ferns thrive in temperate forests, and some species are 
even adapted to arid habitats.
As mentioned earlier, ferns and other monilophytes are 
more closely related to seed plants than to lycophytes. As a 
result, monilophytes and seed plants share traits that are  
not found in lycophytes, including megaphyll leaves and 
roots that can branch at various points along the length of 
an existing root. In lycophytes, by contrast, roots branch 
only at the growing tip of the root, forming a!Y-shaped 
structure.
The monilophytes called horsetails were very diverse 
during the Carboniferous period, some growing as tall as 
15!m. Today, only 15 species survive as a single, widely 
distributed genus, Equisetum, often found in marshy places 
and along streams.
Psilotum (whisk ferns) and a closely related genus, 
Tmesipteris, form a clade consisting mainly of tropical epi-
phytes. Plants in these two genera, the only vascular plants 
lacking true roots, once were called “living fossils” because 
of their resemblance to fossils of ancient relatives of liv-
ing vascular plants (see Figures!29.16 and 29.19). However, 
much evidence, including analyses of DNA sequences and 
sperm structure, indicates that the genera Psilotum and 
Tmesipteris are closely related to ferns. This hypothesis 
suggests that their ancestor’s true roots were lost 
during evolution. Today, plants in these two gen-
era absorb water and nutrients through numerous 
absorptive rhizoids.
The Significance of Seedless Vascular 
Plants
The ancestors of living lycophytes, horsetails, and 
ferns, along with their extinct seedless vascular rela-
tives, grew to great heights during the Devonian 
and early Carboniferous, forming the first forests 
(Figure 29.20). How did their dramatic growth affect 
Earth and its other life?
FernHorsetailLycophyte trees
c Figure 29.20 Artist’s conception of a 
Carboniferous forest based on fossil evidence. 
Lycophyte trees, with trunks covered with small leaves, 
thrived in the “coal forests” of the Carboniferous, along 
with giant ferns and horsetails.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   687 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 689 ===

 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 29.1
Plants evolved from green algae (pp. 673–677)
• Morphological and biochemical traits, as well as similarities in 
nuclear and chloroplast genes, indicate that certain charophyte 
algae are the closest living relatives of plants.
• A protective layer of sporopollenin and other traits allow 
charophytes to tolerate occasional drying along the edges of 
ponds and lakes. Such traits may have enabled the algal ancestors 
of plants to survive in terrestrial conditions, opening the way to 
the colonization of dry land.
• Derived traits that distinguish plants from charophytes, their 
closest algal relatives, include cuticles, stomata, multicellular 
dependent embryos, walled spores produced in sporangia, and 
the two shown here:
1 2
Haploid
Diploid
Apical meristem
of shoot
Developing
leaves
Apical meristems
Mitosis Mitosis
Gamete
Zygote
Sporophyte
Gametophyte
Mitosis
Spore
n
Alternation of generations
MEIOSIS FERTILIZATION
n
2n
n
n
CONCEPT 29.2
Mosses and other nonvascular plants have life cycles 
dominated by gametophytes (pp. 677–683)
• Lineages leading to the three extant clades of nonvascular plants, or 
bryophytes—liverworts, mosses, and hornworts—diverged 
from other plants early in plant evolution.
• In bryophytes, the dominant generation consists of haploid 
gametophytes, such as those that make up a carpet of moss. 
Rhizoids anchor gametophytes to the substrate on which they 
grow. The flagellated sperm produced by antheridia require a 
film of water to travel to the eggs in the archegonia.
• The diploid stage of the life cycle—the sporophytes—grow out 
of archegonia and are attached to the gametophytes and depen-
dent on them for nourishment. Smaller and simpler than vascular 
plant sporophytes, they typically consist of a foot, seta (stalk), 
and sporangium.
• Sphagnum, or peat moss, is common in large regions known as 
peatlands and has many practical uses, including as a fuel.
? Summarize the ecological importance of mosses.
CONCEPT 29.3
Ferns and other seedless vascular plants were the first 
plants to grow tall (pp. 683–688)
• Fossils of the forerunners of today’s vascular plants date back 
about 425 million years and show that these small plants had in-
dependent, branching sporophytes and a vascular system.
• Over time, other derived traits of living vascular plants arose, 
such as a life cycle with dominant sporophytes, lignified vascular 
tissue, well-developed roots and leaves, and sporophylls.
• Seedless vascular plants include the lycophytes (phylum 
Lycophyta: club mosses, spikemosses, and quillworts) and the 
monilophytes (phylum Monilophyta: ferns, horsetails, and 
whisk ferns and relatives). Current evidence indicates that seed-
less vascular plants, like bryophytes, do not form a clade.
• Ancient lineages of lycophytes included both small herbaceous 
plants and large trees. Present-day lycophytes are small herba-
ceous plants.
• Seedless vascular plants formed the earliest forests 385 million 
years ago. Their growth may have contributed to a major global 
cooling that took place during the Carboniferous period. The de-
caying remnants of the first forests eventually became coal.
? What trait(s) allowed vascular plants to grow tall, and why might 
increased height have been advantageous?
• Fossils show that plants arose more than 470 million years ago. 
Subsequently, plants diverged into several major groups, in-
cluding nonvascular plants (bryophytes); seedless vascular 
plants, such as lycophytes and ferns; and the two groups of 
seed plants: gymnosperms and angiosperms.
? Draw a phylogenetic tree illustrating our current understanding of 
plant phylogeny; label the common ancestor of plants and the origins of 
vascular tissue, apical meristems, and seeds.
688 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
CONCEPT CHECK 29.3
1. List the key derived traits found in monilophytes and seed 
plants, but not in lycophytes.
2. How do the main similarities and differences between seed-
less vascular plants and nonvascular plants affect function in 
these plants?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS In Figure 29.17, if fertilization 
occurred between gametes from one gametophyte, how 
would this affect the production of genetic variation from 
sexual reproduction? See Concept 13.4.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
a global cooling, now contributes to global warming by 
returning carbon to the atmosphere (see Figure 56.29).
Growing along with the seedless plants in Carboniferous 
swamps were primitive seed plants. Though seed plants were 
not dominant at that time, they rose to prominence after 
the swamps began to dry up at the end of the Carboniferous 
period. The next chapter traces the origin and diversification 
of seed plants, continuing our story of adaptation to life 
on!land.
29 Chapter Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   688 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 690 ===

 CHAPTER 29  Nonvascular and Seedless V ascular Plants 689
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. Identify each of the following structures as haploid  
or diploid.
a. sporophyte
b. spore
c. gametophyte
d. zygote
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION • DRAW IT Draw a 
phylogenetic tree that represents our current understanding 
of evolutionary relationships between a moss, a gymnosperm, 
a lycophyte, and a fern. Use a charophyte alga as the outgroup. 
(See Figure 22.5 to review phylogenetic trees.) Label each 
branch point of the phylogeny with at least one derived 
character unique to the clade descended from the common 
ancestor represented by the branch point.
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • INTERPRET THE DATA The feather 
moss Pleurozium schreberi harbors species of symbiotic nitrogen-
fixing bacteria. Scientists studying this moss in northern forests 
found that the percentage of the ground surface “covered” by 
the moss increased from about 5% in forests that burned 35 to 
41 years ago to about 70% in forests that burned 170 or more 
years ago. From mosses growing in these forests, they also 
obtained the following data on nitrogen fixation:
Age (years after fire)
N fixation rate  
[kg N/(ha · yr)]
35 0.001
41 0.005
78 0.08
101 0.3
124 0.9
170 2.0
220 1.3
244 2.1
270 1.6
300 3.0
355 2.3
Data from O. Zackrisson et al., Nitrogen fixation increases with 
successional age in boreal forests, Ecology 85:3327–3334 (2006).
(a)  Use the data to draw a line graph, with age on the x-axis and 
the nitrogen fixation rate on the y-axis.
(b)  Along with the nitrogen added by nitrogen fixation, about 
1 kg of nitrogen per hectare per year is deposited into north-
ern forests from the atmosphere as rain and small particles. 
Evaluate the extent to which Pleurozium affects nitrogen avail-
ability in northern forests of different ages.
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS Giant lycophyte 
trees had microphylls, whereas ferns and seed plants have 
megaphylls. Write a short essay (100–150 words) describing 
how a forest of lycophyte trees may have differed from a forest 
of large ferns or seed plants. In your answer, consider how the 
type of forest may have affected interactions among small 
plants growing beneath the tall ones.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
These stomata are from the leaf of a common horsetail. 
Describe how stomata and other adaptations facilitated life on 
land and ultimately led to the formation of the first forests.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C29_PRF.indd   689 14/03/20   3:54 AM

=== SIDE 691 ===

Figure 30.1 In 1980, Mount St. Helens in Washington state erupted, 
leaving the region covered in ash and devoid of visible life. Just a few years 
later, seed plants such as fireweed (Chamerion angustifolium) had already 
colonized the barren landscape—an example of seed plants’ versatility and 
success as the dominant producers on land.
Seed Plants30
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 30
• Figure 30.3 Walkthrough: From Ovule to 
Seed in a Gymnosperm
• Figure 30.12 Walkthrough: The Life 
Cycle of an Angiosperm
• Animation: Angiosperm Life Cycle
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Using Natural 
Logarithms to Interpret Data
• Tutorial: Gymnosperms
Study Tip
Make flowcharts: Make simple 
flowcharts showing the main events in 
the life cycles of a pine and flowering 
plant. The example shown is the 
beginning of a flowchart summarizing 
the pine life cycle.
30.1 Seeds and pollen grains are key 
adaptations for life on land p. 691
30.2 Gymnosperms bear “naked” seeds, 
typically on cones p. 694
30.3 The reproductive adaptations of 
angiosperms include flowers and 
fruits p. 698
30.4 Human welfare depends on seed 
plants p. 705
KEY CONCEPTS
What adaptations have enabled seed plants
to make up the vast majority of plant biodiversity?
Reduced male and 
female gametophytes 
develop within parental 
sporophytes, protected from 
environmental stresses.
Pollen protects male gametophytes (which 
produce sperm) and can be transported 
by wind or animals.
Ovules protect female gametophytes (which 
produce eggs).
Pollen-producing
structures
Pollen-producing
structures
Ovules
Ovules
Seed coat
(protects embryo)
Embryo
Food supply
(nourishes embryo)
In gymnosperms,
the gametophytes
develop within
cones.
In angiosperms,
the gametophytes
develop within
flowers.
An ovule fertilized by pollen develops into 
a seed.
Fireweed seed
Main events in pine life cycle
Pollen grain is released
from a pollen cone
Pollen grain reaches
an ovule and forms
a pollen tube
690
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   690 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 692 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 691
seed plants cope with conditions such as drought and exposure to 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation in sunlight. They also freed seed plants 
from requiring water for fertilization, enabling reproduction under 
a broader range of conditions than in seedless plants.
Advantages of Reduced Gametophytes
Mosses and other bryophytes have life cycles dominated by 
gametophytes, whereas ferns and other seedless vascular plants 
have sporophyte-dominated life cycles. The evolutionary trend 
of gametophyte reduction continued further in the vascular 
plant lineage that led to seed plants (Figure 30.2). While the 
gametophytes of seedless vascular plants are visible to the naked 
eye, the gametophytes of most seed plants are microscopic.
This miniaturization allowed for an important evolution-
ary innovation in seed plants: Their tiny gametophytes can 
develop from spores retained within the sporangia of the paren-
tal sporophyte. This arrangement can protect the gametophytes 
from environmental stresses. For example, the moist reproduc-
tive tissues of the sporophyte shield the gametophytes from UV 
radiation and protect them from drying out. This relationship 
Fireweed and other early arrivals reached the blast zone in 
Figure 30.1 as seeds. A seed consists of an embryo and its 
food supply, surrounded by a protective coat. When mature, 
seeds are dispersed from their parent by wind or other means, 
enabling them to colonize distant locations.
Plants not only have affected the recovery of regions 
such as Mount St. Helens but also have transformed Earth. 
Continuing the saga of how this occurred, this chapter fol-
lows the emergence and diversification of the group to which 
fireweed belongs, the seed plants.
Seeds and pollen grains are key 
adaptations for life on land
We begin with an overview of terrestrial adaptations that seed 
plants added to those already present in nonvascular plants 
(bryophytes) and seedless vascular plants (see Concept 29.1). In 
addition to seeds, all seed plants have reduced gametophytes, het-
erospory, ovules, and pollen. As we’ll see, these adaptations helped 
CONCEPT 30.1
MAKE CONNECTIONS In seed plants, how might retaining the gametophyte within the sporophyte 
affect embryo fitness? (See Concepts 17.5, 23.1, and 23.4 to review mutagens, mutations, and fitness.)
Mosses and other
nonvascular plants
Dominant
Dominant DominantReduced, dependent on
gametophyte for nutrition
Ferns and other seedless
vascular plants
Reduced, independent
(photosynthetic and
free-living)
Reduced (usually microscopic), dependent on surrounding
sporophyte tissue for nutrition
Seed plants (gymnosperms and angiosperms)
PLANT GROUP
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
Example
Gymnosperm Angiosperm
Sporophyte
(2n)
Sporophyte
(2n)
Sporophyte (2n) Sporophyte (2n)
Gametophyte
(n)
Gametophyte
(n)
Microscopic female
gametophytes (n) inside
ovulate cone
Microscopic
female
gametophytes
(n) inside
these parts
of flowers
Microscopic male
gametophytes (n)
inside pollen
cone
Microscopic 
male
gametophytes 
(n) inside 
these parts
of flowers
. Figure 30.2 Gametophyte-sporophyte relationships in different plant groups.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   691 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 693 ===

692 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
whereas those in angiosperms usually have two integuments. 
The whole  structure—megasporangium, megaspore, and their 
integument(s)—is called an ovule (Figure 30.3a). Inside each 
ovule (from the Latin ovulum, little egg), a female gametophyte 
develops from a megaspore and produces one or more eggs.
Pollen and Production of Sperm
A microspore develops into a pollen grain that consists of 
a male gametophyte enclosed within the pollen wall. (The 
wall’s outer layer is made of molecules secreted by sporophyte 
cells, so we refer to the male gametophyte as being in the pol-
len grain, not equivalent to the pollen grain.) Sporopollenin 
in the pollen wall protects the pollen grain as it is transported 
by wind or by hitchhiking on an animal. The transfer of pol-
len to the part of a seed plant that contains the ovules is called 
pollination. If a pollen grain germinates (begins growing), it 
gives rise to a pollen tube that discharges sperm into the female 
gametophyte within the ovule, as shown in Figure 30.3b.
In nonvascular plants and seedless vascular plants such as 
ferns, free-living gametophytes release flagellated sperm that 
swim through a film of water to reach eggs. Given this require-
ment, it is not surprising that many of these species live in 
moist habitats. But a pollen grain can be carried by wind or 
animals, eliminating the dependence on water for sperm trans-
port. The ability of seed plants to transfer sperm without water 
likely contributed to their colonization of dry habitats. The 
sperm of seed plants also do not require motility because they 
are carried to the eggs by pollen tubes. The sperm of some gym-
nosperm species retain the ancient flagellated condition, but 
flagella have been lost in the sperm of most gymnosperms and 
all angiosperms.
also enables the developing gametophytes to obtain nutrients 
from the parental sporophyte. In contrast, the free-living game-
tophytes of seedless vascular plants must fend for themselves.
Heterospory: The Rule Among Seed Plants
You read in Concept 29.3 that most seedless plants are 
 homosporous—they produce one kind of spore, which usually 
gives rise to a bisexual gametophyte. Ferns and other close 
relatives of seed plants are homosporous, suggesting that 
seed plants had homosporous ancestors. At some point, seed 
plants or their ancestors became heterosporous, producing two 
kinds of spores: Megasporangia on modified leaves called 
megasporophylls produce megaspores that give rise to female 
gametophytes, and microsporangia on modified leaves called 
microsporophylls produce microspores that give rise to male 
gametophytes. Each megasporangium has one megaspore, 
whereas each microsporangium has many microspores.
As noted previously, the miniaturization of seed plant 
gametophytes probably contributed to the great success of 
this clade. Next, we’ll look at the development of the female 
gametophyte within an ovule and the development of the 
male gametophyte in a pollen grain. Then we’ll follow the 
transformation of a fertilized ovule into a seed.
Ovules and Production of Eggs
Although a few species of seedless plants are heterosporous, 
seed plants are unique in retaining the megasporangium within 
the parent sporophyte. A layer of sporophyte tissue called 
integument envelops and protects the megasporangium. 
Gymnosperm megasporangia are surrounded by one integument, 
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this figure, a gymnosperm seed contains cells from how many different 
plant generations? Identify the cells and whether each is haploid or diploid.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
Integument (2n)
(a)
Megaspore (n)
Micropyle
Spore wall
Megasporangium (2n)
Male gametophyte
(within a germinated
pollen grain) (n)
Immature
ovulate cone
Female
gametophyte (n)
Discharged
sperm nucleus (n)
Pollen grain (n)
Egg nucleus (n)
Pollen tube
Seed coat
(derived from integument)
Spore wall
(surrounded by
megasporangium
remnant)
Food supply
(female gametophyte
tissue) (n)
Embryo (2n)
(new sporophyte)
Unfertilized ovule. In this longitudinal 
section through the ovule of a pine (a 
gymnosperm), a fleshy megasporangium 
is surrounded by a protective layer of 
tissue called an integument. The 
micropyle, the only opening through the 
integument, allows entry of a pollen grain.
(b)Fertilized ovule. A megaspore develops 
into a female gametophyte, which produces 
an egg. The pollen grain, which had entered 
through the micropyle, contains a male 
gametophyte. The male gametophyte 
develops a pollen tube that discharges 
sperm, thereby fertilizing the egg.
(c)Gymnosperm seed. Fertilization 
initiates the transformation of the 
ovule into a seed, which consists of a 
sporophyte embryo, a food supply, and 
a protective seed coat derived from the 
integument. The megasporangium 
dries out and collapses.
. Figure 30.3 From ovule to seed in a gymnosperm.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   692 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 694 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 693
are multicellular, consisting of an embryo protected by a 
layer of tissue, the seed coat. A seed can remain dormant for 
days, months, or even years after being released from the 
parent plant, whereas most spores have shorter lifetimes. 
Also, unlike spores, seeds have a supply of stored food. Most 
seeds land close to their parent sporophyte plant, but some 
are carried long distances (up to hundreds of kilometers) by 
wind or animals. If conditions are favorable where it lands, 
the seed can emerge from dormancy and germinate, with its 
stored food providing critical support for growth as the spo-
rophyte embryo emerges as a seedling. As we explore in the 
Scientific Skills Exercise, some seeds have germinated after 
more than 1,000 years.
The Evolutionary Advantage of Seeds
If a sperm fertilizes an egg of a seed plant, the zygote grows 
into a sporophyte embryo. As shown in Figure 30.3c, the 
ovule develops into a seed: the embryo, with a food supply, 
packaged in a protective coat derived from the integument(s).
Seeds provide protection from harsh conditions and 
facilitate dispersal to new habitats—as do the spores of seed-
less plants. Moss spores, for example, may survive even if 
the local environment becomes too cold, too hot, or too dry 
for the mosses themselves to live. Their tiny size enables the 
spores to be dispersed in a dormant state to a new area, where 
they can germinate and give rise to new moss gametophytes 
if and when conditions are favorable enough for them to 
break dormancy. Spores were the main way that mosses, 
ferns, and other seedless plants spread over Earth for the first 
100 million years of plant life on land.
Although mosses and other seedless plants continue to 
be very successful today, seeds represent a major evolution-
ary innovation that contributed to the opening of new ways 
of life for seed plants. What advantages do seeds provide 
over spores? Spores are usually single-celled, whereas seeds 
How Long Can Seeds Remain Viable in Dormancy?  
Environmental conditions can vary greatly over time, and they 
may not be favorable for germination when seeds are produced. 
One way that plants cope with such variation is through seed 
dormancy. Under favorable conditions, seeds of some species can 
germinate after many years of dormancy.
One unusual opportunity to test how long seeds can remain 
viable occurred when seeds from date palm trees (Phoenix dactylifera) 
were discovered under the rubble of a 2,000-year-old fortress near 
the Dead Sea. As you saw in the Chapter 2 Scientific Skills Exercise and 
Concept 25.2, scientists use radiometric dating to estimate the ages 
of fossils and other old objects. In this exercise, you will estimate the 
ages of three of these ancient seeds by using natural logarithms.
How the Experiment Was Done Scientists measured the frac-
tion of carbon-14 that remained in three ancient date palm 
seeds: two that were not planted and one that was planted and 
germinated. For the germinated seed, the scientists used a seed 
coat fragment found clinging to a root of the seedling. (The 
seedling grew into the plant in the photo.)
Data from the Experiment This table shows the fraction of 
carbon-14 remaining from the three ancient date palm seeds.
Fraction of Carbon-14 
Remaining
Seed 1 (not planted) 0.7656
Seed 2 (not planted) 0.7752
Seed 3 (germinated) 0.7977
INTERPRET THE DATA 
A logarithm is the power to which 
a base is raised to produce a given 
number x. For example, if the base 
is 10 and x = 100, the logarithm of 
100 equals 2 (because 102 = 100). 
A natural logarithm (ln) is the loga-
rithm of a number x to the base e, 
where e is about 2.718. Natural loga-
rithms are useful in calculating rates 
of some natural processes, such as 
radioactive decay.
The equation F=e-kt describes the fraction F of an original 
isotope remaining after a period of t years; the exponent is 
negative because it refers to a decrease over time. The constant 
k provides a measure of how rapidly the original isotope decays. 
For the decay of carbon-14 to nitrogen-14, k = 0.00012097.
To estimate t, the age of the three seeds, we rearrange the 
equation F=e-kt to find an equation for t: 
t=-aln F
kb
1. Using the equation for t, the data from the table, and a calcu-
lator, estimate the ages of seed 1, seed 2, and seed 3.
2. Why do you think there was more carbon-14 in the germi-
nated seed?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Using Natural Logarithms  
to Interpret Data
Data from S. Sallon et al., Germination, genetics, and growth of an ancient date 
seed, Science 320:1464 (2008).
CONCEPT CHECK 30.1
1. Contrast how sperm reach the eggs of seedless plants with 
how sperm reach the eggs of seed plants.
2. What features not present in seedless plants have contrib-
uted to the success of seed plants on land?
3. WHAT IF? If a seed could not enter dormancy, how might 
that affect the embryo’s transport or survival?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   693 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 695 ===

694 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
into fruits.) Most gymnosperms are cone-bearing plants called 
conifers, such as pines, firs, and redwoods.
The Life Cycle of a Pine
As you read earlier, seed plant evolution has included three 
key reproductive adaptations: the miniaturization of their 
gametophytes; the advent of the seed as a resistant, dispers-
ible stage in the life cycle; and the appearance of pollen as 
an airborne agent that brings gametes together. Figure 30.4 
shows how these adaptations come into play during the life 
cycle of a pine, a familiar conifer.
Gymnosperms bear “naked” 
seeds, typically on cones
Extant seed plants form two 
sister clades: gymnosperms 
and angiosperms. Recall 
that gymnosperms have 
“naked” seeds exposed on sporophylls that usually form cones. 
(Angiosperm seeds are enclosed in chambers that mature 
CONCEPT 30.2
Nonvascular plants (bryophytes)
Seedless vascular plants
AngiospermsAngiosperms
Gymnosperms
MEIOSIS
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
Haploid (n)
Key
Diploid (2n)
1
Ovulate cone
Longitudinal section
of ovulate cone
Germinating
pollen grain
Surviving
megaspore (n)
Mature
sporophyte
(2n)
Seedling
Longitudinal section
of pollen cone
Pollen cones
Ovule
Megasporocyte (2n)
Microsporocytes
(2n) Megasporangium (2n)
Archegonium
Discharged
sperm nucleus (n)
Egg
nucleus (n)
Integument
Microsporangium (2n)
Microsporangia
Seeds on surface
of ovulate scale
Food reserves
(gametophyte
tissue) (n) Seed
coat (2n)
Embryo
(new sporophyte)
(2n)
Female
gametophyte
Pollen
tube
3
4
5
6
     By the time the eggs are mature,
sperm cells have developed in the
pollen tube, which extends to the
female gametophyte. Fertilization occurs
when sperm and egg nuclei unite.
7
8
     Microsporocytes divide by meiosis,
producing haploid microspores. A 
microspore develops into a pollen
grain (a male gametophyte enclosed
within the pollen wall).
2
Pollen
grains (n)
     An ovulate cone scale has two ovules, 
each containing a megasporangium. Only 
one ovule is shown.
  In most conifer species, each tree 
has both ovulate and pollen cones.
     Fertilization usually occurs more than a year 
after pollination. All eggs may be fertilized, 
but usually only one zygote develops into an 
embryo. The ovule becomes a seed, consisting 
of an embryo, food supply, and seed coat.
     While the pollen 
tube develops, the 
megasporocyte 
undergoes meiosis, 
producing four 
haploid cells. One 
survives as a 
megaspore.
     The megaspore 
develops into a female 
gametophyte that 
contains two or three 
archegonia, each of 
which will form an egg.
     Pollination occurs 
when a pollen grain 
reaches the ovule. The 
pollen grain then 
germinates, forming a  
pollen tube that slowly 
digests its way through 
the megasporangium.
. Figure 30.4 The life cycle of a pine.
MAKE CONNECTIONS What type of cell division occurs as a megaspore 
develops into a female gametophyte? Explain. (See Figure 13.10.)
 Mastering Biology Animation: Pine Life Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   694 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 696 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 695
dominated by lycophytes, horsetails, ferns, and other seedless 
vascular plants. As the Carboniferous period gave way to the 
Permian (299 to 252 million years ago), the climate became 
much drier. As a result, the lycophytes, horsetails, and ferns 
that dominated Carboniferous swamps were largely replaced 
by gymnosperms, which were better suited to the drier climate.
Gymnosperms thrived as the climate dried, in part because 
they have the key terrestrial adaptations found in all seed plants, 
such as seeds and pollen. In addition, some gymnosperms were 
particularly well suited to arid conditions because of the thick cuti-
cles and relatively small surface areas of their needle-shaped leaves.
Gymnosperms dominated terrestrial ecosystems throughout 
much of the Mesozoic era, which lasted from 252 to 66 million 
years ago. In addition to serving as the food supply for giant 
herbivorous dinosaurs, these gymnosperms were involved in 
many other interactions with animals. Recent fossil discover-
ies, for example, show that some gymnosperms 
were pollinated by insects more than 100 mil-
lion years ago—the earliest evidence of insect 
pollination in any plant group (Figure 30.6). 
Late in the Mesozoic, angiosperms began to 
replace gymnosperms in some ecosystems.
Gymnosperm Diversity
Although angiosperms now dominate most 
terrestrial ecosystems, gymnosperms remain 
an important part of Earth’s flora. For exam-
ple, vast regions in northern latitudes are cov-
ered by forests of conifers (see Figure 51.13).
Of the ten plant phyla (see Table 29.1), four 
are gymnosperms: Cycadophyta, Ginkgophyta, 
Gnetophyta, and Coniferophyta. It is uncertain 
how the four phyla of gymnosperms are related 
to each other. Figure 30.7 surveys the diversity 
of extant gymnosperms.
The pine tree is the sporophyte; its sporangia are located 
on scalelike structures packed densely in cones. Like all seed 
plants, conifers are heterosporous. As such, they have two types 
of sporangia that produce two types of spores: microsporangia 
that produce microspores and megasporangia that produce 
megaspores. In conifers, the two types of spores are produced by 
separate cones: small pollen cones and large ovulate cones.
Pollen cones have a relatively simple structure: Their scales 
are modified leaves (microsporophylls) that bear microsporan-
gia. Within each microsporangium, cells called microsporocytes 
undergo meiosis, producing haploid microspores. Each micro-
spore develops into a pollen grain containing a male gameto-
phyte. In conifers, the yellow pollen is released in large amounts 
and carried by the wind, dusting everything in its path.
Ovulate cones are more complex: Their scales are 
compound structures composed of both modified leaves 
(megasporophylls bearing megasporangia) and modified 
stem tissue. Within each megasporangium, megasporocytes 
undergo meiosis and produce haploid megaspores inside the 
ovule. Surviving megaspores develop into female gameto-
phytes, which are retained within the sporangia.
In most pine species, each tree has both types of cones. 
From the time pollen and ovulate cones appear on the tree, 
it takes nearly three years for the male and female gameto-
phytes to be produced and brought together and for mature 
seeds to form from fertilized ovules. The scales of each ovu-
late cone then separate, and seeds are dispersed by the wind. 
A seed that lands in a suitable environment germinates, its 
embryo emerging as a pine seedling.
Early Seed Plants and the Rise of Gymnosperms
The origins of characteristics found in pines and other living seed 
plants date back to the late Devonian period (380 million years 
ago). Fossils from that time reveal that some plants 
had acquired features that are also present in seed 
plants, such as megaspores and microspores. For 
example, Archaeopteris was a heterosporous tree 
with a woody stem. It grew up to 20 m tall and 
had fernlike leaves. But it did not bear seeds and 
therefore is not classified as a seed plant.
The earliest evidence of seed plants comes 
from 360-million-year-old fossils of plants in 
the genus Elkinsia (Figure 30.5). These and 
other early seed plants lived 55 million years 
before the first fossils classified as gymnosperms 
and more than 200 million years before the first 
fossils of angiosperms. These early seed plants 
became extinct, and we don’t know which 
extinct lineage gave rise to the gymnosperms.
The oldest fossils of species from an extant 
lineage of gymnosperms are 305 million 
years old. These early gymnosperms lived in 
moist Carboniferous ecosystems that were 
Pollen grains 
. Figure 30.6 An ancient pollinator. This 110-million-year-old 
fossil shows pollen on an insect, the thrip Gymnopollisthrips minor. 
Structural features of the pollen suggest that it was produced by 
gymnosperms (most likely by species related to extant ginkgos or 
cycads). Although most gymnosperms today are wind-pollinated, 
many cycads are insect-pollinated.
OvuleOvule
. Figure 30.5 A fossil of the 
early seed plant Elkinsia.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   695 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 697 ===

696 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Ginkgo biloba is the only surviving species of this phylum; like 
cycads, ginkgos have ﬂagellated sperm. Also known as the maiden-
hair tree, Ginkgo biloba has deciduous fanlike leaves that turn 
gold in autumn. It is a popular ornamental tree in cities because it 
tolerates air pollution well. Landscapers often plant only pollen-
producing trees because the ﬂeshy seeds smell rancid as they decay.
The 350 species of living cycads have large cones and palmlike 
leaves (true palm species are angiosperms). Unlike most seed 
plants, cycads have ﬂagellated sperm, indicating their descent from 
seedless vascular plants that had motile sperm. Cycads thrived 
during the Mesozoic era, known as the age of cycads as well as the 
age of dinosaurs. Today, however, cycads are the most endangered 
of all plant groups: 75% of their species are threatened by habitat 
destruction and other human actions.
Phylum Gnetophyta includes plants in three genera: Gnetum, 
Ephedra, and Welwitschia. Some species are tropical, whereas 
others live in deserts. Although very different in appearance, 
the genera are grouped together based on molecular data.
Phylum Cycadophyta
Phylum
Ginkgophyta
Phylum Gnetophyta
Gnetum. This genus 
includes about 35 species 
of tropical trees, shrubs, 
and vines, mainly native 
to Africa and Asia. Their 
leaves look similar to 
those of ﬂowering plants, 
and their seeds look 
somewhat like fruits.
Welwitschia (also below). 
This genus consists of one 
species, Welwitschia 
mirabilis, a plant that can 
live for thousands of years 
and is found only in the 
deserts of southwestern 
Africa. Its straplike leaves 
are among the largest 
leaves known.
Ephedra. This genus 
includes about 40 species 
that inhabit arid regions 
worldwide. These desert 
shrubs, commonly called 
“Mormon tea,” produce 
the compound ephedrine, 
which is used medicinally 
as a decongestant.
c
c
b
Ginkgo biloba
Encephalartos woodii
Ovulate cones
Gnetum
gnemon
leaves
. Figure 30.7 E x p l o r i n g  G y m n o s p e r m  D i v e r s i t y
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   696 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 698 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 697
Phylum Coniferophyta
Phylum Coniferophyta,  the largest gymnosperm phyla, consists 
of about 600 species of conifers (from the Latin conus, cone, and 
ferre, to carry), including many large trees. Most species have 
woody cones, but a few have ﬂeshy cones. Some, such as pines, 
have needlelike leaves. Others, such as redwoods, have scalelike 
leaves. Some species dominate vast northern forests, whereas 
others are native to the Southern Hemisphere.
     Most conifers are evergreens; they retain their leaves through-
out the year. Even during winter, a limited amount of photosyn-
thesis occurs on sunny days. When spring comes, conifers 
already have fully developed leaves that can take advantage of 
the sunnier, warmer days. Some conifers, such as the dawn 
redwood, tamarack, and larch, are deciduous trees that lose leaves 
each autumn.
&oWgNCUƂT This ever- 
green tree (Pseudotsuga 
menziesii ) provides more 
timber than any other 
North American tree 
species. Some uses in- 
clude house framing, 
plywood, pulpwood for 
paper, railroad ties, and 
boxes and crates.
%oOOonLWniRGT 
The “berries” of the 
common juniper 
(Juniperus communis) 
are actually ovule-
producing cones 
consisting of ﬂeshy 
sporophylls.
European larch The needlelike leaves of this 
deciduous conifer (Larix decidua) turn yel-
low before they are shed in autumn. Native to 
the mountains of central Europe, including 
Switzerland’s Matterhorn, depicted here, this 
species is extremely cold-tolerant, able to sur- 
vive winter temperatures that plunge to –50°C. 
9oNNGOiRinG Survivors 
of a conifer group once 
known only from fossils, 
living Wollemi pines 
(Wollemia nobilis) were 
discovered in 1994 in a 
national park near Sydney, 
Australia. At that time, the 
species consisted of 40 
known trees. As a result of 
conservation efforts, it is 
now widely propagated. The 
inset photo compares the 
leaves of this “living fossil” 
with actual fossils.
5GSWoiC This giant sequoia 
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) in 
California’s Sequoia National Park 
weighs about 2,500 metric tons, 
equivalent to about 24 blue 
whales (the largest animals) or 
40,000 people. The giant sequoia 
is one of the largest living organ- 
isms and also among the most 
ancient, with some individuals esti- 
mated to be between 1,800 and 
2,700 years old. Their cousins, the 
coast redwoods (Sequoia semper- 
virens), grow to heights of more 
than 110 m (taller than the Statue 
of Liberty) and are found only in a 
narrow coastal strip of northern 
California and southern Oregon.
$TiUVNGEonGRinG This species (Pinus 
longaeva), which is found in the White 
Mountains of California, includes some of 
the world’s oldest living organisms. One 
bristlecone pine was recently found to be 
more than 5,000 years old, and some may 
be even older.
c
c
c
c
b
b
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   697 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 699 ===

698 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
1. Explain how the pine life cycle in Figure 30.4 reflects the five 
adaptations common to all seed plants.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Based on Figure 30.4, compare and contrast 
the function of pollination and fertilization in sexual repro-
duction in pines.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Early seed plants in genus Elkinsia are 
a sister group to a clade consisting of gymnosperms and angio-
sperms. Draw a phylogenetic tree of seed plants that shows 
Elkinsia, gymnosperms, and angiosperms; date the branch 
points on this tree using fossil evidence. (See Figure 22.5.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
StamenAnther
Filament
Single carpel
(Simple pistil)
Stigma
Style
Ovary
Sepal
Petal
Ovule
Receptacle
. Figure 30.8 The structure of an idealized flower.CONCEPT CHECK 30.2
CONCEPT 30.3
The reproductive adaptations  
of angiosperms include flowers 
and fruits
Commonly known as flow-
ering plants, angiosperms 
are seed plants with the 
reproductive structures 
called flowers and fruits. The name angiosperm (from the 
Greek angion, container) refers to seeds contained in fruits. 
Angiosperms are the most diverse and widespread of all 
plants, with more than 290,000 species (about 90% of all 
plant species).
Characteristics of Angiosperms
All angiosperms are classified in a single phylum, Anthophyta. 
Before considering the evolution of angiosperms, we will 
examine two of their key adaptations—flowers and fruits—
and the roles of these structures in the angiosperm life cycle.
Flowers
The flower is a unique angiosperm structure that is special-
ized for sexual reproduction. In many angiosperm species, 
insects or other animals transfer pollen from one flower to the 
sex organs on another flower, which makes pollination more 
directed than the wind-dependent pollination of most spe-
cies of gymnosperms. However, some angiosperms are wind-
pollinated, particularly those species that occur in dense pop-
ulations, such as grasses and tree species in temperate forests.
A flower is a specialized shoot that can have up to four 
types of modified leaves called floral organs: sepals, petals, 
stamens, and carpels (Figure 30.8). Starting at the base of the 
flower are the sepals, which are usually green and enclose 
the flower before it opens (think of a rosebud). Interior to the 
sepals are the petals, which are brightly colored in most flow-
ers and can aid in attracting pollinators. Flowers that are wind-
pollinated, such as grasses, generally lack brightly colored 
parts. In all angiosperms, the sepals and petals are sterile floral 
organs, meaning that they do not produce sperm or eggs.
Nonvascular plants (bryophytes)
Seedless vascular plants
Angiosperms
Gymnosperms
Within the petals are two types of fertile floral organs that 
produce spores, the stamens and carpels. Stamens and car-
pels are sporophylls, modified leaves that are specialized for 
reproduction. Stamens are microsporophylls: They produce 
microspores that develop into pollen grains containing male 
gametophytes. A stamen consists of a stalk called the filament 
and a terminal sac, the anther, where pollen is produced. 
Carpels are megasporophylls: They produce megaspores that 
give rise to female gametophytes. The carpel is the “container” 
mentioned earlier in which seeds are enclosed; as such, it is 
a key structure that distinguishes angiosperms from gymno-
sperms. At the tip of the carpel is a sticky stigma that receives 
pollen. A style leads from the stigma to a structure at the 
base of the carpel, the ovary; the ovary contains one or more 
ovules. As in gymnosperms, each angiosperm ovule contains a 
female gametophyte. If fertilized, an ovule develops into a seed.
A flower may have one or more carpels. In many species, 
multiple carpels are fused into one structure. The term pistil 
is sometimes used to refer to a single carpel (a simple pistil) or 
two or more fused carpels (a compound pistil). Flowers also 
vary in symmetry (Figure 30.9) and other aspects of shape, as 
Radial
symmetry
(daffodil)
Bilateral
symmetry
(orchid)
In radial symmetry, the 
sepals, petals, stamens, and 
carpels radiate out from a 
center. Any line through the 
central axis divides the flower 
into two equal parts.
 
In bilateral symmetry, the 
flower can only be divided 
into two equal parts by a 
single line.
Sepal
Fused petals
. Figure 30.9 Flower symmetry.
DRAW IT Draw the single line that can divide the 
bilaterally symmetrical flower into two equal parts.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   698 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 700 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 699
As shown in Figure 30.11, various adaptations of fruits and 
seeds help to disperse seeds (see also Figure 38.12). The seeds 
of some flowering plants, such as dandelions and maples, are 
contained within fruits that function like parachutes or propel-
lers, adaptations that enhance dispersal by wind. Some fruits, 
such as coconuts, are adapted to dispersal by water. And the 
seeds of many angiosperms are carried by animals. Some angio-
sperms have fruits modified as burrs that cling to animal fur (or 
the clothes of humans). Others produce edible fruits, which are 
usually nutritious, sweet tasting, and vividly colored, advertis-
ing their ripeness. When an animal eats the fruit, it digests the 
fruit’s fleshy part, but the tough seeds usually pass unharmed 
through the animal’s digestive tract. When the animal def-
ecates, it may deposit the seeds, along with a supply of natural 
fertilizer, many kilometers from where the fruit was eaten.
well as size, color, and odor. Much of this diversity results from 
adaptation to specific pollinators (see Figures 38.4 and 38.5).
Fruits
As seeds develop from ovules after fertilization, the ovary 
wall thickens and the ovary matures into a fruit. A pea pod 
is an example of a fruit, with seeds (mature ovules, the peas) 
encased in the ripened ovary (the pod).
Fruits protect seeds and aid in their dispersal. Mature fruits 
can be either fleshy or dry (Figure 30.10). Tomatoes, plums, and 
grapes are examples of fleshy fruits, in which the wall (pericarp) 
of the ovary becomes soft during ripening. Dry fruits include 
beans, nuts, and grains. Some dry fruits split open at maturity 
to release seeds, whereas others remain closed. The dry, wind- 
dispersed fruits of grasses, harvested while on the plant, are 
major staple foods for humans. The cereal grains of maize, rice, 
wheat, and other grasses, though easily mistaken for seeds, are 
each actually a fruit with a dry outer covering (the former wall 
of the ovary) that adheres to the seed coat of the seed within.
. Tomato, a fleshy fruit with soft outer 
and inner layers of pericarp (fruit wall)
. Ruby grapefruit, a fleshy fruit 
with a firm outer layer and soft 
inner layer of pericarp
. Hazelnut, a dry fruit 
that remains closed 
at maturity
. Nectarine, a fleshy 
fruit with a soft outer 
layer and hard inner 
layer (pit) of pericarp
b Milkweed, a dry 
fruit that splits 
open at maturity
. Figure 30.10 Some variations in fruit structure.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Fruit Structure and Seed Dispersal
Wings enable 
maple fruits 
to be carried 
by the wind.
Seeds within 
berries and 
other edible 
fruits are often 
dispersed in 
animal feces.
The barbs of 
cockleburs facilitate 
seed dispersal by 
allowing the fruits 
to “hitchhike” on 
animals.
c
b
c
Some plants have 
mechanisms that 
disperse seeds by 
explosive action.
b
. Figure 30.11 Fruit adaptations that enhance seed dispersal.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   699 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 701 ===

700 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
pollen tube. Each ovule, which develops in the ovary, contains 
a female gametophyte, also known as an embryo sac. The 
embryo sac consists of only a few cells, one of which is the egg.
After its release from the anther, the pollen is carried to 
the sticky stigma at the tip of a carpel. Although some flow-
ers self-pollinate, most have mechanisms that ensure cross- 
pollination, which in angiosperms is the transfer of pollen 
from an anther of a flower on one plant to the stigma of a 
The Angiosperm Life Cycle
You can follow a typical angiosperm life cycle in Figure 30.12. 
The flower of the sporophyte produces microspores that form 
male gametophytes and megaspores that form female game-
tophytes. The male gametophytes are in the pollen grains, 
which develop within microsporangia in the anthers. Each 
male gametophyte has two haploid cells: a generative cell that 
divides, forming two sperm, and a tube cell that produces a 
Haploid (n)
Key
Diploid (2n)
FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS
      When a seed
germinates, the
embryo develops
into a mature
sporophyte.
7
      The zygote
develops into an
embryo that is
packaged along
with food into a
seed. (The fruit
tissues surround-
ing the seed are
not shown.)
6
Pollen
grains
Stigma
Pollen
tube
Tube
nucleus
Sperm
StylePolar nuclei
in central cell
Egg cell (n)
Female gametophyte
(embryo sac)
Four
megaspores
(n)
Integuments
Micropyle
Ovule with
megasporangium (2n)
Ovary
Germinating
seed
Embryo (2n) 
Endosperm (3n)
Seed coat (2n)
Nucleus of
developing
endosperm
(3n)
Zygote (2n)
Seed
Discharged
sperm nuclei (n)
Megasporangium
(2n)
Mature flower on
sporophyte plant
(2n)
Egg
nucleus (n)
Synergid cells
Antipodal cells
     In the anther of a stamen, each microsporangium
contains many microsporocytes. Each microsporocyte
divides by meiosis, producing four microspores.
2
     A microspore develops
into a pollen grain. The gen-
erative cell of the gameto-
phyte will divide, forming
two sperm. The tube cell
will produce the pollen tube.
3 
     In the megasporan-
gium of each ovule, the
megasporocyte divides
by meiosis, producing
four megaspores. Usually
only one survives. It
undergoes three mitotic
divisions and produces a
female gametophyte.
1
     Double fertilization occurs. One 
sperm fertilizes the egg, forming a 
zygote. The other sperm fertilizes the
central cell, forming the endosperm
(a food supply, 3n in this example).
5
     Each pollen tube
elongates through
the style. When
reaching an ovule,
it discharges its
two sperm.
4
Stamen
(microsporophyll)
Carpel
(megasporophyll)
MEIOSIS
Microsporangia
(pollen sacs)
Microsporocyte (2n)
Four microspores (n)
Microspore (n)
Generative cell
Tube cell
Tube nucleus
Male gametophyte (n)
(in pollen grain)
. Figure 30.12 The life cycle of an angiosperm.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this figure, what is the maximum number of seeds this flower could produce? 
To produce that number of seeds, at least how many pollen grains would have to germinate?
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough 
Animation: Angiosperm Life Cycle
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   700 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 702 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 701
relatively sudden and geographically widespread appearance of 
angiosperms in the fossil record (about 100 million years ago, 
based on fossils known to Darwin). Recent fossil evidence and 
phylogenetic analyses have led to progress in solving Darwin’s 
mystery, but we still do not fully understand how angiosperms 
arose from earlier seed plants.
Fossil Angiosperms
Angiosperms are now thought to have originated in the 
early Cretaceous period, about 140 million years ago. By 
the mid-Cretaceous (100 million years ago), angiosperms 
began to dominate some terrestrial ecosystems. Landscapes 
changed dramatically as conifers and other gymnosperms 
gave way to flowering plants in many parts of the world. The 
Cretaceous ended 66 million years ago with mass extinctions 
of dinosaurs and many other animal groups and with further 
increases in the diversity and importance of angiosperms.
What evidence suggests that angiosperms arose 140 mil-
lion years ago? First, although pollen grains are common 
in rocks from the Jurassic period (201 to 145 million years 
ago), none of these pollen fossils have features characteris-
tic of angiosperms, suggesting that angiosperms may have 
originated after the Jurassic. Indeed, the earliest fossils with 
distinctive angiosperm features are of 130-million-year-old 
pollen grains discovered in China, Israel, and England. Early 
fossils of larger flowering plant structures include those of 
Archaefructus (Figure 30.13) and Leefructus, both of which were 
discovered in China in rocks that are 125 million years old.  
flower on another plant of the same species. Cross-pollination 
enhances genetic variability. In some species, stamens and 
carpels of a single flower may mature at different times, or 
they may be so arranged that self-pollination is unlikely.
The pollen grain absorbs water and germinates after it adheres 
to the stigma of a carpel. The tube cell produces a pollen tube 
that grows down within the style of the carpel. After reaching the 
ovary, the pollen tube penetrates through the micropyle, a pore 
in the integuments of the ovule, and discharges two sperm cells 
into the female gametophyte (embryo sac). One sperm fertilizes 
the egg, forming a diploid zygote. The other sperm fuses with the 
two nuclei in the large central cell of the female gametophyte, 
producing a triploid cell (3n). This type of double fertilization, 
in which one fertilization event produces a zygote and the other 
produces a triploid cell, is unique to angiosperms.
After double fertilization, the ovule matures into a seed. 
The zygote develops into a sporophyte embryo with a rudi-
mentary root and one or two seed leaves called cotyledons. 
The triploid central cell of the female gametophyte develops 
into endosperm, tissue rich in starch and other food reserves 
that nourish the developing embryo.
What is the function of double fertilization in angio-
sperms? One hypothesis is that double fertilization syn-
chronizes the development of food storage in the seed with 
the development of the embryo. If a particular flower is not 
pollinated or sperm cells are not discharged into the embryo 
sac, fertilization does not occur, and neither endosperm nor 
embryo forms. So perhaps double fertilization is an adapta-
tion that prevents flowering plants from 
squandering nutrients on infertile ovules.
Another type of double fertilization 
occurs in some gymnosperm species 
belonging to the phylum Gnetophyta. 
However, double fertilization in these 
species gives rise to two embryos rather 
than to an embryo and endosperm.
As you read earlier, the seed consists 
of the embryo, the endosperm, and 
a seed coat derived from the integu-
ments. An ovary develops into a fruit 
as its ovules become seeds. After being 
dispersed, a seed may germinate if envi-
ronmental conditions are favorable. The 
coat ruptures and the embryo emerges 
as a seedling, using food stored in the 
endosperm and cotyledons until it can 
produce its own food by photosynthesis.
Angiosperm Evolution
Charles Darwin once referred to the origin 
of angiosperms as an “abominable mys-
tery.” He was particularly troubled by the 
5 cm
(a)
(b) Artist’s reconstruction of
Archaefructus sinensis
Carpel
Possible
floats
Stamen
Archaefructus sinensis, a 125-million-
year-old fossil. This herbaceous species had 
simple flowers and bulbous structures that 
may have served as floats, suggesting it was 
aquatic. Recent phylogenetic analyses 
indicate that Archaefructus may belong to 
the water lily group.
. Figure 30.13 An early flowering plant.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   701 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 703 ===

702 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
flowerlike structures that may have been pollinated by insects 
(Figure 30.14a). However, the Bennettitales and other similar 
lineages of extinct woody seed plants did not have carpels or 
flowers and hence are not classified as angiosperms.
Making sense of the origin of angiosperms also depends on 
working out the order in which angiosperm clades diverged 
from one another. Here, dramatic progress has been made in 
recent years. Molecular and morphological evidence suggests 
that the shrub Amborella trichopoda, water lilies, and star anise 
are living representatives of lineages that diverged from other 
angiosperms early in the history of the group (Figure 30.14b). 
Amborella is woody, supporting the conclusion mentioned 
earlier that the angiosperm common ancestor was probably 
woody. Like the Bennettitales, Amborella, water lilies, and star 
anise lack vessel elements, efficient water-conducting cells that 
are found in most present-day angiosperms. Overall, based 
on the features of ancestral species and angiosperms like 
Amborella, researchers have hypothesized that early angio-
sperms were woody shrubs that had small flowers and rela-
tively simple water-conducting cells.
Evolutionary Links with Animals
Plants and animals have interacted for hundreds of millions 
of years, and those interactions have led to evolutionary 
change. For example, herbivores can reduce a plant’s repro-
ductive success by eating its roots, leaves, or seeds. As a result, 
Overall, early angiosperm fossils indicate that the group arose 
and began to diversify over a 20- to 30-million-year period—a 
less sudden event than was suggested by the fossils known 
during Darwin’s lifetime.
Can we infer traits of the angiosperm common ancestor 
from traits found in early fossil angiosperms? Archaefructus, 
for example, was herbaceous and had bulbous structures 
that may have served as floats, suggesting it was aquatic. But 
investigating whether the angiosperm common ancestor 
was herbaceous and aquatic also requires examining fossils 
of other seed plants thought to have been closely related to 
angiosperms. All of those plants were woody, indicating that 
the common ancestor was probably woody and probably not 
aquatic. As we’ll see, this conclusion has been supported by 
recent phylogenetic analyses.
Angiosperm Phylogeny
Molecular and morphological evidence suggests that extant 
gymnosperm lineages had diverged from the lineage leading 
to angiosperms by 305 million years ago. Note that this does 
not imply that angiosperms originated 305 million years 
ago, but that the most recent common ancestor of extant 
gymnosperms and angiosperms lived at that time. Indeed, 
angiosperms may be more closely related to several extinct 
lineages of woody seed plants than they are to gymnosperms. 
One such lineage is the Bennettitales, an extinct group with 
Living
gymnosperms
Most recent common ancestor
of all living angiosperms
Microsporangia
(contain
microspores)
Ovules
(a)
Water lilies
Star anise and
relatives
Magnoliids
Monocots
Eudicots
Amborella
†Bennettitales
050100150
Millions of years ago
200250300
A close relative of the angiosperms? 
This reconstruction shows a longitudinal 
section through the flowerlike structures 
found in the Bennettitales, an extinct group 
of woody seed plants hypothesized to be more 
closely related to extant angiosperms than 
to extant gymnosperms.
(b)Angiosperm phylogeny. This tree represents a current hypothesis of angiosperm 
evolutionary relationships, based on morphological and molecular evidence. Angiosperms 
originated about 140 million years ago. The dotted line indicates the uncertain position of 
the Bennettitales, which may be the sister taxon to the angiosperms.
. Figure 30.14 Angiosperm evolutionary  
history.
VISUAL SKILLS Would the branching order of the phylogeny in (b) necessarily have to be redrawn 
if a 150-million-year-old fossil monocot were discovered? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   702 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 704 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 703
A key step in this approach is to identify cases in which a 
clade with bilaterally symmetric flowers shares an immediate 
common ancestor with a clade whose members have radi-
ally symmetric flowers. One recent study identified 19 pairs 
of closely related “bilateral” and “radial” clades. On average, 
the clade with bilaterally symmetric flowers had nearly 2,400 
more species than did the related clade with radial symmetry. 
This result suggests that flower shape can affect the rate at 
which new species form, perhaps by affecting the behavior 
of insect pollinators. Overall, plant-pollinator interactions 
may have contributed to the increasing dominance of flow-
ering plants in the Cretaceous period, making angiosperms 
centrally important to ecological communities.
Angiosperm Diversity
From their humble beginnings in the Cretaceous period, 
angiosperms have diversified into more than 290,000 liv-
ing species. Until the late 1990s, most systematists divided 
flowering plants into two groups, based partly on the number 
of cotyledons, or seed leaves, in the embryo. Species with one 
cotyledon were called monocots, and those with two were 
called dicots. Other features, such as flower and leaf structure, 
were also used to define the two groups. Recent DNA studies, 
however, indicate that the species traditionally called dicots 
are paraphyletic. The vast majority of species once categorized 
as dicots form a large clade, now known as eudicots (“true” 
dicots). Figure 30.16 compares the main characteristics of 
monocots and eudicots. The rest of the former dicots are now 
grouped into four small lineages. Three of these lineages—
Amborella, water lilies, and star anise and relatives—are infor-
mally called basal angiosperms because they diverged from 
other angiosperms early in the history of the group (see Figure 
30.14b). A fourth lineage, the magnoliids, evolved later. 
Figure 30.17 provides an overview of angiosperm diversity.
if an effective defense against herbivores originates in a group 
of plants, those plants may be favored by natural selection—
as will herbivores that overcome this new defense. Plant-
pollinator and other mutually beneficial interactions also can 
have such reciprocal evolutionary effects.
Plant-pollinator interactions also may have affected the 
rates at which new species form. Consider the impact of a flow-
er’s symmetry (see Figure 30.9). On a flower with bilateral sym-
metry, an insect pollinator can obtain nectar (a sugary solution 
secreted by flower glands) only when landing in a certain posi-
tion (Figure 30.15). This constraint makes it more likely that 
pollen is placed on a part of the insect’s body that will come 
into contact with the stigma of a flower of the same species. 
Such specificity of pollen transfer reduces gene flow between 
diverging populations and could lead to increased rates of spe-
ciation in plants with bilateral symmetry. This hypothesis can 
be tested using the approach illustrated in this diagram:
“Bilateral” clade Compare 
numbers
of species
Time since divergence
from common ancestor
Common
ancestor
“Radial” clade
Monocot
Characteristics
Eudicot
Characteristics
Embryos
One cotyledon Veins usually
parallel
Vascular tissue
scattered
Root system
usually fibrous
(no main root)
Pollen grain with
one opening
Floral organs
usually in
multiples of three
Two cotyledons Veins usually
netlike
Vascular tissue
usually arranged
in ring
Taproot (main root) 
usually present
Pollen grain with
three openings
Floral organs usually
in multiples of
four or five
Leaf venation Stems Roots Pollen Flowers
. Figure 30.16 Characteristics of monocots and eudicots.
Stamens
b Figure 30.15 A bee pollinating 
a bilaterally symmetrical flower. 
To harvest nectar from this Scottish 
broom flower, a honeybee must land 
as shown. This releases a tripping 
mechanism that arches the flower’s 
stamens over the bee and dusts it 
with pollen. Later, some of this pollen 
may rub off onto the stigma of the 
next flower the bee visits.
 Mastering Biology Video: Bee 
Pollinating
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   703 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 705 ===

704 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Surviving basal angiosperms consist of three lineages comprising only about 100 species. 
The first lineage to have diverged from other angiosperms is represented today by a single 
species, Amborella trichopoda (right). The other surviving lineages diverged later: a clade 
that includes water lilies and a clade consisting of the star anise and its relatives.
Magnoliids consist of about 8,500 species, most notably magnolias, 
laurels, and black pepper plants. They include both woody and 
herbaceous species. Although they share some traits with basal 
angiosperms, such as a typically spiral rather than whorled arrange-
ment of floral organs, magnoliids are more closely related to eudicots 
and monocots.
Basal Angiosperms
Magnoliids
About one-quarter of angiosperm species are monocots — about 72,000 species. Some of 
the largest groups are the orchids, grasses, and palms. Grasses include some of the most 
agriculturally important crops, such as maize, rice, and wheat.
Monocots
More than two-thirds of angiosperm species are eudicots— roughly 210,000 species. The largest 
group is the legume family, which includes such crops as peas and beans. Also important economi-
cally is the rose family, which includes many plants with ornamental flowers as well as some 
species with edible fruits, such as strawberry plants and apple and pear trees. Most of the familiar 
flowering trees  are eudicots, such as oak, walnut, maple, willow, and birch.
Eudicots
Barley
(Hordeum
vulgare),
a grass
Dog rose
(Rosa canina),
a wild rose
b Water lily (Nymphaea ”Rene 
Gerard”). Species of water lilies 
are found in aquatic habitats 
throughout the world. Water   
lilies belong to a clade that 
diverged from other angiosperms 
early in the group’s history.
b Star anise (Illicium). This 
genus belongs to a third 
surviving lineage of basal 
angiosperms.
b Southern magnolia (Magnolia         
grandiflora). This member of the 
magnolia family is a large tree. The 
variety of southern magnolia shown 
here, called ”Goliath,” has flowers that 
measure up to about a foot across.
b Orchid                               
(Paphiopedilum 
callosum)
b Snow pea 
(Pisum 
sativum), a 
legume
m Armenian oak 
(Quercus pontica)
Amborella trichopoda. 
This small shrub,found 
only on the South Pacific 
island of New Caledonia, 
may be the sole survivor 
of a branch at the base of 
the angiosperm tree. 
c
c
c
m Pygmy date palm 
(Phoenix roebelenii)
. Figure 30.17 E x p l o r i n g  A n g i o s p e r m  D i v e r s i t y
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   704 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 706 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 705
them. Willow leaves and bark have long been used in pain-
relieving remedies, including prescriptions by the Greek phy-
sician Hippocrates. In the 1800s, scientists traced the willow’s 
medicinal property to the chemical salicin. A synthesized 
derivative, acetylsalicylic acid, is what we call aspirin. Plants 
are also a direct source of medicinal compounds (Table 30.1). 
In the United States, about 25% of prescription drugs contain 
an active ingredient from plants, usually seed plants.
Threats to Plant Diversity
Although plants may be a renewable resource, plant diversity 
is not. The exploding human population and its demand 
for space and resources are threatening plant species across 
the globe. The problem is especially severe in the tropics, 
where more than two-thirds of the human population live 
and where population growth is fastest. About 63,000 km2 
(15 million acres) of tropical rain forest are cleared each year 
(Figure 30.18), a rate that would completely eliminate the 
remaining 11 million km2 of tropical forests in 175 years. The 
loss of forests reduces the absorption of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide (CO2) that occurs during photosynthesis, potentially 
contributing to global warming. Also, as forests disappear, so 
do large numbers of plant species. Of course, once a species 
becomes extinct, it can never return.
The loss of plant species is often accompanied by the 
loss of insects and other rain forest animals. Scientists esti-
mate that if current rates of loss in the tropics and elsewhere 
1. It is said that an oak is an acorn’s way of making more 
acorns. Write an explanation that includes these terms: spo-
rophyte, gametophyte, ovule, seed, ovary, and fruit.
2. Compare the process of double fertilization in angiosperms 
with that in gymnosperms.
3. WHAT IF? Do speciation rates in closely related clades of 
flowering plants show that flower shape is correlated with 
the rate at which new species form or that flower shape is 
responsible for this rate? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 30.3
CONCEPT 30.4
Human welfare depends  
on seed plants
In forests and on farms, seed plants are key sources of food, 
fuel, wood products, and medicine. Our reliance on them 
makes the preservation of plant diversity critical.
Products from Seed Plants
Most of our food comes from angiosperms. Just six crops—
maize, rice, wheat, potatoes, cassava, and sweet potatoes—
yield 80% of all the calories consumed by humans. We also 
depend on angiosperms to feed livestock: It takes 5–7 kg of 
grain to produce 1 kg of grain-fed beef.
Today’s crops are the products of artificial selection—the 
result of plant domestication that began about 12,000 years 
ago. To appreciate the scale of this transformation, note how 
the number and size of seeds in domesticated plants are greater 
than those of their wild relatives, as in the case of maize and the 
grass teosinte (see Figure 38.16). Scientists can glean informa-
tion about domestication by comparing the genes of crops with 
those of wild relatives. With maize, dramatic changes such as 
increased cob size and loss of the hard coating around teosinte 
kernels may have been initiated by as few as five mutations.
Flowering plants also provide other edible products. Two 
popular beverages come from tea leaves and coffee beans, and 
you can thank the cacao tree for cocoa and chocolate. Spices 
are derived from various plant parts, such as flowers (cloves, 
saffron), fruits and seeds (vanilla, black pepper, mustard), 
leaves (basil, mint, sage), and even bark (cinnamon).
Many seed plants are sources of wood, which is absent 
in all living seedless plants. Wood consists of tough-walled 
xylem cells (see Figure 35.22). It is the primary source of fuel 
for much of the world, and wood pulp, typically derived from 
conifers such as fir and pine, is used to make paper. Wood 
remains the most widely used construction material.
For centuries, humans have also depended on seed plants 
for medicines. Many cultures use herbal remedies, and sci-
entists have extracted and identified medicinally active 
compounds from many of these plants and later synthesized 
Compound Source Use
Atropine Belladonna plant Eye pupil dilator
Digitalin Foxglove Heart medication
Menthol Eucalyptus tree Throat soother
Quinine Cinchona tree Malaria preventive
Taxol Pacific yew Ovarian cancer drug
Tubocurarine Curare tree Muscle relaxant
Vinblastine Periwinkle Leukemia drug
5 km
. Figure 30.18 Clear-cutting of tropical forests. Over the 
past several hundred years, nearly half of Earth’s tropical forests 
have been cut down and converted to farmland and other uses. A 
satellite image from 1975 (left) shows a dense forest in Brazil. By 
2012, much of this forest had been cut down. Deforested and urban 
areas are shown as light purple.
Table 30.1 Examples of Plant-Derived Medicines
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   705 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 707 ===

The tropical rain forest may be a medicine chest of healing 
plants that could be extinct before we even know they exist. 
If we begin to view rain forests and other ecosystems as living 
treasures that can regenerate only slowly, we may learn to 
harvest their products at sustainable rates.
continue, 50% or more of Earth’s species will become extinct 
within the next few centuries. Such losses would constitute a 
global mass extinction, rivaling the Permian and Cretaceous 
mass extinctions and forever changing the evolutionary his-
tory of plants (and many other organisms).
Many people have ethical concerns about contributing 
to the extinction of species. In addition, there are practical 
reasons to be concerned about the loss of plant diversity. So 
far, we have explored the potential uses of only a tiny fraction 
of the more than 325,000 known plant species. For example, 
almost all our food is based on the cultivation of only about 
two dozen species of seed plants. And fewer than 5,000 plant 
species have been studied as potential sources of medicines. 
CONCEPT CHECK 30.4
1. Explain why plant diversity can be considered a nonrenew-
able resource.
2. WHAT IF? How could phylogenies be used to help research-
ers search more efficiently for novel medicines derived from 
seed plants?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
706 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
CONCEPT 30.2
Gymnosperms bear “naked” seeds, typically on cones 
(pp. 694–698)
• Dominance of the sporophyte generation, the development of 
seeds from fertilized ovules, and the role of pollen in transfer-
ring sperm to ovules are key features of a typical gymnosperm 
life cycle.
• Gymnosperms appear early in the plant fossil record and domi-
nated many Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems. Living seed plants 
can be divided into two monophyletic groups: gymnosperms and 
angiosperms. Extant gymnosperms include cycads, Ginkgo biloba, 
gnetophytes, and conifers.
? Although there are just over 1,000 species of gymnosperms, the 
group is still very successful in terms of its evolutionary longevity, 
adaptations, and geographic distribution. Explain.
The reproductive adaptations of angiosperms include 
flowers and fruits (pp. 698–705)
• Flowers generally consist of four types of modified leaves: 
sepals, petals, stamens (which produce pollen), and  
carpels (which produce ovules). Ovaries ripen into fruits, 
which often carry seeds by wind, water, or animals to new 
locations.
• Flowering plants originated about 140 million years ago, and 
by the mid-Cretaceous (100 mya) had begun to dominate some 
terrestrial ecosystems. Fossils and phylogenetic analyses offer in-
sights into the origin of flowers.
• Several groups of basal angiosperms have been identified. 
Other major clades of angiosperms include magnoliids, 
monocots, and eudicots.
• Pollination and other interactions between angiosperms and 
animals may have contributed to the success of flowering plants 
during the last 100 million years.
? Explain why Darwin called the origin of angiosperms an “abominable 
mystery,” and describe what has been learned from fossil evidence and 
phylogenetic analyses.
CONCEPT 30.3
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
30 Chapter Review
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 30.1
Seeds and pollen grains are key adaptations for life  
on land (pp. 691–693)
Microscopic male and
female gametophytes
(n) are nourished and
protected by the
sporophyte (2n)
Male
gametophyte
Female
gametophyte
Reduced
gametophytes
Five Derived Traits of Seed Plants
Microspore (gives rise to
a male gametophyte)
Integument (2n)
Seed coat
Embryo
Food supply
Megasporangium (2n)
Megaspore (n)Ovule
(gymnosperm)
Megaspore (gives rise to
a female gametophyte)
Heterospory
Pollen grains make water 
unnecessary for fertilization
Seeds: survive
better than 
unprotected 
spores, can be 
transported 
long distances
Pollen
Seeds
Ovules
? Describe how the parts of an ovule (integument, megaspore, 
megasporangium) correspond to the parts of a seed.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   706 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 708 ===

 CHAPTER 30  Seed Plants 707
this was the ancestral state for angiosperms. Consider, however, 
the following recent discoveries:
• Our understanding of angiosperm phylogeny has changed to 
that shown in Figure 30.14b.
• Amborella trichopoda has eight-celled female gametophytes and 
triploid endosperm.
• Water lilies and star anise have four-celled female gameto-
phytes and diploid endosperm.
(a) Draw a phylogeny of the angiosperms (see Figure 30.14b), 
incorporating the data given above about the number of cells 
in female gametophytes and the ploidy of the endosperm. 
Assume that all of the star anise relatives have four-celled 
female gametophytes and diploid endosperm.
(b) What does your labeled phylogeny suggest about the evolution 
of the female gametophyte and endosperm in angiosperms?
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Cells are 
the basic units of structure and function in all organisms. 
A key feature in the life cycle of plants is the alternation of 
multicellular haploid and diploid generations. Imagine a 
lineage of flowering plants in which mitotic cell division did 
not occur between the events of meiosis and fertilization (see 
Figure 30.12). In a short essay (100–150 words), describe how 
this change in the timing of cell division would affect the 
structure and life cycle of plants in this lineage.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This photograph 
shows a milkweed 
seed in flight. Describe 
how seeds and other 
adaptations in seed 
plants contributed 
to the rise of seed 
plants and their 
dominant role in plant 
communities today.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
Human welfare depends on seed plants (pp. 705–706)
• Humans depend on seed plants for products such as food, wood, 
and many medicines.
• Destruction of habitat threatens the extinction of many plant 
species and the animal species they support.
? Explain why destroying the remaining tropical forests might harm 
humans and lead to a mass extinction.
CONCEPT 30.4
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
6. DRAW IT  Use the letters a–d to label where on the phylogenetic 
tree each of the following derived characters appears.
a. flowers
b. embryos
c. seeds
d. vascular tissue
Charophyte green algae
Mosses
Ferns
Gymnosperms
Angiosperms
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION The history of life has been 
punctuated by several mass extinctions. For example,  
the impact of a meteorite may have wiped out most of the 
dinosaurs and many forms of marine life at the end of  
the Cretaceous period (see Concept 25.4). Fossils indicate 
that plants were less severely affected by this mass extinction. 
What adaptations may have enabled plants to withstand this 
disaster better than animals?
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT As will be described in 
detail in Concept 38.1, the female gametophyte of angiosperms 
typically has seven cells, one of which, the central cell, contains 
two haploid nuclei. After double fertilization, the central cell 
develops into endosperm, which is triploid. Because magnoliids, 
monocots, and eudicots typically have female gametophytes 
with seven cells and triploid endosperm, scientists assumed that 
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How have Earth’s forests changed over time?
Go to “Seeing the Forest for the Trees”
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–5 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C30_PRF.indd   707 3/21/20   2:31 AM

=== SIDE 709 ===

Figure 31.1 These little mushrooms are just the small aboveground extension 
of a vast network of filaments located below the forest floor. Such underground 
fungal networks, called mycelia, in some cases link mushrooms that are hundreds of 
meters apart. In fact, the largest known mycelium spreads beneath 965 hectares of 
forest—more than the area of 1,800 football fields.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 31
• Animation: Life Cycle of a Mushroom
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Activity: Fungal Reproduction and 
Nutrition
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Synthesizing 
Information from Multiple Data Sets
31.1 Fungi are heterotrophs that feed by 
absorption p. 709
31.2 Fungi produce spores through 
sexual or asexual life cycles p. 711
31.3 The ancestor of fungi was an aquatic, 
single-celled, flagellated protist p. 713
31.4 Fungi have radiated into a diverse 
set of lineages p. 714
31.5 Fungi play key roles in nutrient 
cycling, ecological interactions, and 
human welfare p. 721
KEY CONCEPTS
Introduction to Fungi31
Study Tip
Draw a diagram: To help you 
recognize key differences between the 
life cycles of fungi and humans, draw 
and label simple diagrams like the 
partial example shown here depicting 
the life stages at which meiosis, mitosis, 
gamete formation, a multicellular 
organism, and fertilization occur in 
humans and in fungi.
MEIOSIS FERTILIZATION
Gametes
Diploid
multicellular
organism
Human life cycle:
n n
2n
n
How do structure and function in fungi 
relate to their role in ecosystems?
Hyphae absorb 
the released 
nutrients.
Hyphae secrete 
enzymes 
that break down 
organic matter, 
releasing nutrients.
Almost any organic molecule can 
be digested by at least some fungi, 
making them highly effective 
decomposers in ecosystems.
As they grow, multicellular fungi 
extend filaments called hyphae into 
their surroundings.
Spores enable fungi to 
colonize new envrironments. 
The spores germinate and 
grow when conditions 
are favorable.
Spores
Hyphae
Nutrients
708
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   708 3/14/20   3:33 AM

=== SIDE 710 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 709
as fallen logs, animal corpses, and the wastes of organisms. 
Parasitic fungi absorb nutrients from the cells of living hosts. 
Some parasitic fungi are pathogenic, including many species 
that cause diseases in plants and others that cause diseases in 
animals. Mutualistic fungi also absorb nutrients from a host, but 
they reciprocate with actions that benefit the host. For example, 
mutualistic fungi that live within the digestive tracts of certain 
termite species use their enzymes to break down wood, as do 
mutualistic protists in other termites (see Figure 28.29).
The versatile enzymes that enable fungi to digest a wide 
range of food sources are not the only reason for their ecologi-
cal success. Another important factor is how their body struc-
ture increases the efficiency of nutrient absorption.
Body Structure
The most common fungal body structures are multicellular 
filaments and single cells (yeasts). Many fungal species can 
grow as both filaments and yeasts, but even more grow only 
as filaments; relatively few species grow only as single-celled 
yeasts. Yeasts often inhabit moist environments, including 
plant sap and animal tissues, where there is a ready supply of 
soluble nutrients, such as sugars and amino acids.
The morphology of multicellular fungi enhances their 
ability to grow into and absorb nutrients from their surround-
ings (Figure 31.2). The bodies of these fungi typically form a 
The hidden network of fungal filaments in Figure 31.1 is a fitting 
symbol of the neglected grandeur of the kingdom Fungi. Most of 
us are barely aware of these eukaryotes beyond the mushrooms 
we eat or the occasional brush with athlete’s foot. Yet fungi are 
a huge and important component of the biosphere. Some fungi 
are exclusively single-celled, though most have complex multi-
cellular bodies. These diverse organisms are found in just about 
every imaginable terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
Fungi are not only diverse and widespread but also essen-
tial for the well-being of most ecosystems. They break down 
organic material and recycle nutrients, allowing other organ-
isms to assimilate essential chemical elements. In this chap-
ter, we will investigate the structure and evolutionary history 
of fungi, survey the major groups of fungi, and discuss their 
ecological and commercial significance.
CONCEPT 31.1
Fungi are heterotrophs that feed 
by absorption
Despite their vast diversity, all fungi share some key traits— 
most importantly, the way they derive nutrition. Another  
key characteristic of many fungi is that they grow by forming 
multicellular filaments, a body structure that plays an impor-
tant role in how they obtain food.
Nutrition and Ecology
Like animals, fungi are heterotrophs: 
They cannot make their own food as 
plants and algae can. But unlike ani-
mals, fungi do not ingest (eat) their 
food. Instead, a fungus absorbs nutri-
ents from the environment outside of 
its body. Many fungi do this by secret-
ing hydrolytic enzymes into their sur-
roundings. These enzymes break down 
complex molecules to smaller organic 
compounds that the fungi can absorb 
into their cells and use. Other fungi use 
enzymes to penetrate the walls of cells, 
enabling the fungi to absorb nutrients 
from the cells. Collectively, the differ-
ent enzymes found in various fungal 
species can digest compounds from a 
wide range of sources, living or dead.
This diversity of food sources cor-
responds to the varied roles of fungi in 
ecological communities: Different spe-
cies live as decomposers, parasites, or 
mutualists. Fungi that are decompos-
ers break down and absorb nutrients 
from nonliving organic material, such 
Mycelium
Spore-producing
structures
Reproductive structure.
Tiny haploid cells called spores are 
produced inside the mushroom.
Hyphae. The mushroom and its
subterranean mycelium are a
continuous network of hyphae.
60 om
. Figure 31.2 Structure of a multicellular fungus. The top photograph shows the sexual 
structures, in this case called mushrooms, of the penny bun fungus (Boletus edulis). The bottom 
photograph shows a mycelium growing on fallen conifer needles. The inset SEM shows hyphae.
? Although the mushrooms in the top photograph appear to be different individuals, could their 
DNA be identical? Explain.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Fungal Growth and Nutrition
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   709 3/14/20   3:33 AM

=== SIDE 711 ===

710 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Mycorrhizal fungi (fungi that form mycorrhizae) can 
improve delivery of phosphate ions and other minerals to 
plants because the vast mycelial networks of the fungi are 
more efficient than the plants’ roots at acquiring these min-
erals from the soil. In exchange, the plants supply the fungi 
with organic nutrients such as carbohydrates.
There are two main types of mycorrhizal fungi (see 
Figure 37.14). Ectomycorrhizal fungi (from the Greek ektos, 
out) form sheaths of hyphae over the surface of a root and 
typically grow into the extracellular spaces of the root cortex. 
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi extend arbuscules through 
the root cell wall and into tubes formed by invagination (push-
ing inward, as in Figure 31.4b) of the root cell plasma mem-
brane. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you’ll compare genomic 
data from fungi that form mycorrhizae and fungi that do not.
Mycorrhizae are enormously important both in natural 
ecosystems and in agriculture. Almost all vascular plants 
have mycorrhizae and rely on their fungal partners for essen-
tial nutrients. Foresters commonly inoculate pine seedlings 
network of tiny filaments called hyphae (singular, hypha). 
Hyphae consist of tubular cell walls surrounding the plasma 
membrane and cytoplasm of the cells. The cell walls are 
strengthened by chitin, a strong but flexible polysaccharide. 
Chitin-rich walls can enhance feeding by absorption. As a fun-
gus absorbs nutrients from its environment, the concentrations 
of those nutrients in its cells increases, causing water to move 
into the cells by osmosis. The movement of water into fungal 
cells creates pressure that could cause their cells to burst if they 
were not surrounded by a chitin-strengthened, rigid cell wall.
Another important structural feature of most fungi is 
that their hyphae are divided into cells by cross-walls, or 
septa (singular, septum) (Figure 31.3a). Septa generally have 
pores large enough to allow ribosomes, mitochondria, and 
even nuclei to flow from cell to cell. Some fungi lack septa 
(Figure 31.3b). Known as coenocytic fungi, these organ-
isms consist of a continuous cytoplasmic mass having hun-
dreds or thousands of nuclei. The coenocytic condition results 
from the repeated division of nuclei without cytokinesis.
Fungal hyphae form an interwoven mass called a 
mycelium (plural, mycelia) that infiltrates the material on 
which the fungus feeds (see Figure 31.2). The structure of a 
mycelium maximizes its surface-to-volume ratio, making feed-
ing very efficient. Just 1 cm3 of rich soil may contain as much 
as 1 km of hyphae with a total surface area of 300 cm2 in con-
tact with the soil. A fungal mycelium grows rapidly, as proteins 
and other materials synthesized by the fungus move through 
cytoplasmic streaming to the tips of the extending hyphae. The 
fungus concentrates its energy and resources on adding hyphal 
length and thus overall absorptive surface area, rather than on 
increasing hyphal girth. Multicellular fungi are not motile in 
the typical sense—they cannot run, swim, or fly in search of 
food or mates. However, as they grow, such fungi can move 
into new territory, swiftly extending the tips of their hyphae.
Specialized Hyphae in Mycorrhizal Fungi
Some fungi have specialized hyphae that allow them to feed on 
living animals (Figure 31.4a), while others have modified hyphae 
called haustoria that enable them to extract nutrients from plants. 
Our focus here, however, will be on fungi that have specialized 
branching hyphae such as arbuscules (Figure 31.4b) through 
which fungi exchange nutrients with their plant hosts. Such 
mutually beneficial relationships between fungi and plant roots 
are called mycorrhizae (the term means “fungus roots”).
Cell wall
Nuclei
Septum
Pore
Cell wall
Nuclei
(a) Septate hypha (b) Coenocytic hypha
. Figure 31.3 Two forms of hyphae.
Fungal hypha
Plant cell
Plant cell
plasma
membraneArbuscule
Plant
cell
wall
Nematode
Hyphae
(b)Arbuscules. Some mutualistic fungi have specialized hyphae called 
arbuscules that can exchange nutrients with living plant cells. 
Arbuscules remain separated from a plant cell’s cytoplasm by the 
plasma membrane of the plant cell (orange).
(a)Hyphae adapted for trapping and killing prey. In Arthrobotrys, 
a soil fungus, portions of the hyphae are modified as hoops that 
can constrict around a nematode (roundworm) in less than a 
second. The growing hyphae then penetrate the worm’s body, and 
the fungus digests its prey’s inner tissues (SEM).
12 om
. Figure 31.4 Specialized hyphae.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   710 3/14/20   3:33 AM

=== SIDE 712 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 711
with mycorrhizal fungi to promote growth. In the absence 
of human intervention, mycorrhizal fungi colonize soils by 
dispersing haploid cells called spores that form new mycelia 
after germinating. Spore dispersal is a key component of how 
fungi reproduce and spread to new areas, as we discuss next.
CONCEPT CHECK 31.1
1. How do mycorrhizal fungi establish mutually beneficial rela-
tionships with host plants?
2. WHAT IF? Suppose a certain fungus is a mutualist that lives 
within an insect host, yet its ancestors were parasites that 
grew in and on the insect’s body. What derived traits might 
you find in this mutualistic fungus?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Review Figure 11.3 and Figure 11.5. 
If a plant has mycorrhizae, where might carbon that enters 
the plant’s stomata as CO2 eventually be deposited: in the 
plant, in the fungus, or both? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Fungi produce spores through 
sexual or asexual life cycles
Most fungi propagate themselves by producing vast numbers 
of spores, either sexually or asexually. For example, puffballs, 
the reproductive structures of certain fungal species, may 
release trillions of spores (see Figure 31.17). Spores can be car-
ried long distances by wind or water. If they land in a moist 
place where there is food, they germinate, producing a new 
mycelium. To appreciate how effective spores are at dispers-
ing, leave a slice of melon exposed to the air. Even without a 
visible source of spores nearby, within a week, you will likely 
observe fuzzy mycelia growing from microscopic spores that 
have fallen onto the melon.
CONCEPT 31.2
Interpreting Genomic 
Data and Generating 
Hypotheses
What Can Genomic Analysis of a 
Mycorrhizal Fungus Reveal About 
Mycorrhizal Interactions? The first 
genome of a mycorrhizal fungus to 
be sequenced was that of the basidio-
mycete Laccaria bicolor (see photo). In 
nature, L. bicolor is a common ectomy-
corrhizal fungus of trees such as poplar and fir, as well as a free-living 
soil organism. In forest nurseries, it is often added to soil to enhance 
seedling growth. The fungus can easily be grown alone in culture 
and can establish mycorrhizae with tree roots in the laboratory. 
Researchers hope that studying the genome of Laccaria will yield clues 
to the processes by which it interacts with its mycorrhizal partners—
and by extension, to mycorrhizal interactions involving other fungi.
How the Study Was Done U s i n g  t h e  w h o l e - g e n o m e  s h o t-
gun method (see Figure 20.2) and bioinformatics, researchers 
sequenced the genome of L. bicolor and compared it with the 
genomes of some nonmycorrhizal basidiomycete fungi. The team 
used microarrays to compare gene expression levels for different 
protein-coding genes and for the same genes in a mycorrhizal 
mycelium and a free-living mycelium. They could thus identify the 
genes for fungal proteins that are made specifically in mycorrhizae.
Data from the Study
Data from F. Martin et al., The genome of Laccaria bicolor provides insights into 
mycorrhizal symbiosis, Nature 452:88–93 (2008).
Scientific Skills Exercise
L. bicolor123 4
Protein-coding genes 20,614 13,544 10,048 7,302 6,522
Genes for membrane 
transporters
   505    412    471   457   386
Genes for small 
secreted proteins (SSPs)
 2,191    838    163   313    58
Table 1  Numbers of Genes in L. bicolor and Four 
Nonmycorrhizal Fungal Species
Protein ID
Protein Feature 
or Function
Douglas Fir 
ECM/FLM 
Ratio
Poplar  
ECM/FLM 
Ratio
298599 SSP 22,877 12,913
293826 Enzyme inhibitor 14,750 17,069
333839 SSP 7,844 1,931
316764 Enzyme 2,760 1,478
Table 2   L. bicolor Genes Most Highly Upregulated in 
Ectomycorrhizal Mycelium (ECM) of Douglas Fir  
or Poplar Versus Free-Living Mycelium (FLM)
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. (a) In Table 1, which fungal species has the most genes 
encoding membrane transporters (membrane transport 
proteins; see Concept 8.2)? (b) Why might these genes be 
of particular importance to L. bicolor?
2. The phrase “small secreted proteins” (SSPs) refers to proteins 
less than 100 amino acids in length that the fungi secrete; their 
function is not yet known. (a) Describe the Table 1 data on SSPs. 
(b) The researchers found that the SSP genes shared a common 
feature that indicated the encoded proteins were destined for 
secretion. Based on Figure 17.22 and the text discussion of that 
figure, predict what this common feature of the SSP genes was. 
(c) Suggest a hypothesis for the roles of SSPs in mycorrhizae.
3. Table 2 shows data from gene expression studies for the 
four L. bicolor genes whose transcription was most increased 
(“upregulated”) in mycorrhizae. (a) For the gene encoding the 
first protein listed, what does the number 22,877 indicate? 
(b) Do the data in Table 2 support your hypothesis in question 
2(c)? Explain. (c) Compare the data for poplar mycorrhizae 
with those for Douglas fir and hypothesize what might 
account for any differences.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   711 3/14/20   3:33 AM

=== SIDE 713 ===

712 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Hours, days, or (in some fungi) even 
centuries may pass between plasmogamy 
and the next stage in the sexual cycle, 
karyogamy. During karyogamy, the 
haploid nuclei contributed by the two par-
ents fuse, producing diploid cells. Zygotes 
and other transient structures form dur-
ing karyogamy, the only diploid stage in 
most fungi. Meiosis then restores the hap-
loid condition, ultimately leading to the 
formation of genetically diverse spores. 
Meiosis is a key step in sexual reproduc-
tion, so spores produced in this way are 
sometimes referred to as “sexual spores.”
The sexual processes of karyogamy 
and meiosis generate extensive genetic 
variation, a prerequisite for natural selec-
tion. (See Concepts 13.2 and 23.1 to review 
how sex can increase genetic diversity.) The 
heterokaryotic condition also offers some of 
the advantages of diploidy in that one haploid 
genome may compensate for harmful mutations 
in the other.
Asexual Reproduction
Many fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually, as shown 
in Figure 31.5; others, however, reproduce only sexually or 
only asexually. As with sexual reproduction, the processes of 
asexual reproduction vary widely among fungi.
Many fungi reproduce asexually by growing as filamen-
tous fungi that produce (haploid) spores by mitosis; such 
species are informally referred to as molds if they form vis-
ible mycelia. Depending on your housekeeping habits, you 
may have observed molds in your kitchen, forming furry 
carpets on bread or fruit (Figure 31.6). Molds typically grow 
rapidly and produce many spores asexually, enabling the 
fungi to colonize new sources of food. Many species that 
Figure 31.5 generalizes the many different life cycles that 
can produce fungal spores. In this section, we will survey the 
main aspects of sexual and asexual reproduction in fungi.
Sexual Reproduction
The nuclei of fungal hyphae and the spores of most fungi 
are haploid, although many species have transient diploid 
stages that form during sexual life cycles. Sexual reproduction 
often begins when hyphae from two mycelia release signaling 
molecules called pheromones. If the mycelia are of differ-
ent mating types, the pheromones from each partner bind 
to receptors on the other, and the hyphae extend toward the 
source of the pheromones. When the hyphae meet, they fuse. 
In species with such a “compatibility test,” this process con-
tributes to genetic variation by preventing hyphae from fus-
ing with other hyphae from the same mycelium or another 
genetically identical mycelium.
The union of the cytoplasms of two parent mycelia is 
known as plasmogamy (see Figure 31.5). In most fungi, the 
haploid nuclei contributed by each parent do not fuse right 
away. Instead, parts of the fused mycelium contain coexisting, 
genetically different nuclei. Such a mycelium is said to be a 
heterokaryon (meaning “different nuclei”). In some species, 
the haploid nuclei pair off two to a cell, one from each parent. 
Such a mycelium is dikaryotic (meaning “two nuclei”). As a 
dikaryotic mycelium grows, the two nuclei in each cell divide 
in tandem without fusing. Because these cells retain two sepa-
rate haploid nuclei, they differ from diploid cells, which have 
pairs of homologous chromosomes within a single nucleus.
Spore-producing
structures
Mycelium 
Spores
(n) Zygote
(2n)
Heterokaryotic
stage
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
KARYOGAMY
(fusion of nuclei)
PLASMOGAMY
(fusion of cytoplasm)
MEIOSISGERMINATION
GERMINATION
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
Spores (n)
Haploid (n)
Heterokaryotic
(unfused nuclei from
different parents)
Diploid (2n)
Key
. Figure 31.5 Generalized life cycle of fungi. Many fungi reproduce both sexually and 
asexually, as shown here; others, however, reproduce only sexually or asexually.
? Compare the genetic variation found in spores 
produced in the sexual and asexual portions of the life 
cycle. Why do these differences occur?
1.5 om
. Figure 31.6 Penicillium, a 
mold commonly encountered 
as a decomposer of food. 
The bead-like clusters in the 
colorized SEM are conidia, 
structures involved in 
asexual reproduction.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   712 3/14/20   3:33 AM

=== SIDE 714 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 713
Central
filament
Septa
c Figure 31.9 Fossil hyphae from the 
fungus Tortotubus (440 million years ago). 
The central filament is surrounded by two 
partially overlapping filaments (LM).
produce such spores can 
also reproduce sexually if 
they happen to contact a 
member of their species of a 
different mating type.
Other fungi reproduce 
asexually by growing as 
single-celled yeasts. Instead 
of producing spores, asexual 
reproduction in yeasts 
occurs by ordinary cell divi-
sion or by the pinching of 
small “bud cells” off a par-
ent cell (Figure 31.7). As 
already mentioned, some fungi that grow as yeasts can also 
grow as filamentous mycelia.
Many yeasts and filamentous fungi have no known sexual 
stage in their life cycle. Since early mycologists (biologists 
who study fungi) classified fungi based mainly on their type 
of sexual structure, this posed a problem. Mycologists have 
traditionally lumped all fungi lacking sexual reproduction 
into a group called deuteromycetes (from the Greek deu-
tero, second, and mycete, fungus). Whenever a sexual stage is 
discovered for a so-called deuteromycete, the species is reclas-
sified in a particular phylum, depending on the type of sexual 
structures it forms. In addition to searching for sexual stages 
of such unassigned fungi, mycologists can now use genomic 
techniques to classify them.
Animals (and their close
protistan relatives)
Nucleariids
Fungi
UNICELLULAR,
FLAGELLATED
ANCESTOR
Opisthokonts
. Figure 31.8 Fungi and their close relatives. Molecular 
evidence indicates that the nucleariids, a group of single-celled 
protists, are the closest living relatives of fungi.
Bud
Parent
cell5 om
. Figure 31.7 The yeast 
Sac charomyces cerevisiae 
in stages of budding. (SEM)
CONCEPT CHECK 31.2
1. MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare Figure 31.5 with Figure 
13.6. In terms of haploidy versus diploidy, how do the life 
cycles of fungi and humans differ?
2. WHAT IF? Suppose that you sample the DNA of two mush-
rooms on opposite sides of your yard and find that they are 
identical. Propose two hypotheses that could reasonably 
account for this result.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 31.3
The ancestor of fungi was an aquatic, 
single-celled, flagellated protist
Data from molecular systematics offer insights into the early 
evolution of fungi. As a result, systematists now recognize 
that fungi and animals are more closely related to each other 
than either group is to plants or to most other eukaryotes.
The Origin of Fungi
Phylogenetic analyses suggest that fungi evolved from a flag-
ellated ancestor. While the majority of fungi lack flagella, two 
basal lineages of fungi (the cryptomycetes and the chytrids, 
as we’ll discuss shortly) do have flagella. Moreover, most of 
the protists that share a close common ancestor with animals 
and fungi also have flagella. DNA sequence data indicate that 
these three groups of eukaryotes—the fungi, the animals, 
and their protistan relatives—form a monophyletic group, or 
clade (Figure 31.8). As discussed in Concept 28.5, members 
of this clade are called opisthokonts, a name that refers 
to the posterior (opistho-) location of the flagellum in these 
organisms.
Within the opisthokont clade, fungi are more closely 
related to several groups of single-celled protists than they 
are to animals, suggesting that the ancestor of fungi was 
unicellular. One such group of unicellular protists, the 
nucleariids, consists of amoebas that feed on algae and 
bacteria. DNA evidence further indicates that animals are 
more closely related to a different group of protists (the 
choanoflagellates) than they are to either fungi or nucleariids. 
Together, these results suggest that multicellularity evolved 
in animals and fungi independently, from different single-
celled ancestors.
Using molecular clock analyses, scien-
tists have estimated that the ancestors of 
animals and fungi diverged into separate 
lineages more than a billion years ago. 
Fossils of certain unicellular, marine 
eukaryotes that lived as early as 
1.5 billion years ago have been 
interpreted as fungi, but those claims 
remain controversial. Furthermore, 
although fungi probably originated in 
aquatic environments, the oldest fossils 
that are widely accepted as fungi are of 
terrestrial species that lived 440 million 
years ago (Figure 31.9). Fungi may 
have colonized land as early as 
505 million years ago: Soils of that age  
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   713 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 715 ===

714 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Fungi have radiated into a 
diverse set of lineages
In the past decade, molecular analyses have reshaped our 
understanding of the evolutionary relationships between 
fungal groups. In addition, metagenomic studies have led 
to the discovery of entirely new groups of fungi. As a result, 
the phylogeny of fungi is undergoing dramatic change. For 
example, one traditional group, the Zygomycota, has been 
abandoned because it was paraphyletic, and its members have 
been reassigned to other groups. Recent studies also indicate 
that the microsporidians, an enigmatic group of unicellular 
parasites, should be classified as fungi and may belong to a 
basal fungal lineage (one that diverged from other fungi early 
in the history of the group).
Figure 31.10 presents a current hypothesis of the relation-
ships among fungal groups. In this section, we’ll survey the 
groups identified in this phylogenetic tree. However, the 
groups shown in Figure 31.10 may represent only a small 
fraction of the diversity of extant fungal groups. (Extant lin-
eages are those that have surviving members.) While there 
are about 145,000 known species of fungi, in recent years 
more than 2,000 new species have been discovered annually. 
By some estimates the actual number of fungal species lies 
between 2.2 and 3.8 million—more than all of the 1.9 million 
species of organisms (of every type) that biologists have cur-
rently identified and named.
have a chemical “signature” similar to that found in soils 
where fungi are active today. Overall, more fossils are needed 
to help clarify when fungi originated and what features were 
present in their earliest lineages.
The Move to Land
Plants colonized land about 470 million years ago (see 
Concept 29.1), and fungi may well have colonized land 
before plants. Indeed, some researchers have described life 
on land before the arrival of plants as a “green slime” that 
consisted of cyanobacteria, algae, and a variety of small, het-
erotrophic species, including fungi. With their capacity for 
extracellular digestion, fungi would have been well suited for 
feeding on other early terrestrial organisms (or their remains).
Once on land, some fungi formed symbiotic associations 
with early plants. For example, 405-million-year-old fossils of 
the early plant Aglaophyton contain evidence of mycorrhizal 
relationships between plants and fungi (see Figure 25.13). This 
evidence includes fossils of hyphae that have penetrated within 
plant cells and formed structures that resemble the arbuscules 
formed today by arbuscular mycorrhizae. Similar structures 
have been found in a variety of other early plants, suggesting 
that plants probably existed in beneficial relationships with 
fungi from the earliest periods of colonization of land. The earli-
est plants lacked roots, limiting their ability to extract nutrients 
from the soil. As occurs in mycorrhizal associations today, it is 
likely that soil nutrients were transferred to early plants via the 
extensive mycelia formed by their symbiotic fungal partners.
Support for the antiquity of mycorrhizal associations has 
also come from molecular studies. For a mycorrhizal fungus and 
its plant partner to establish a symbiotic relationship, certain 
genes must be expressed by the fungus and other genes must 
be expressed by the plant. Researchers focused on three plant 
genes (called sym genes) whose expression is required for the 
formation of mycorrhizae in flowering plants. They found that 
these genes were present in all major plant lineages, including 
basal lineages such as liverworts (see Figure 29.13). Furthermore, 
after they transferred a liverwort sym gene to a flowering plant 
mutant that could not form mycorrhizae, the mutant recov-
ered its ability to form mycorrhizae. These results suggest that 
mycorrhizal sym genes were present in early plants—and that 
the function of these genes has been conserved for hundreds of 
millions of years as plants continued to adapt to life on land.
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
ANCESTRAL
PROTIST
. Figure 31.10 Phylogeny of fungi. This phylogenetic 
hypothesis shows major clades of extant fungi; dotted lines 
indicate evolutionary relationships that are uncertain.
CONCEPT CHECK 31.3
1. Why are fungi classified as opisthokonts despite the fact 
that most fungi lack flagella?
2. Describe the importance of mycorrhizae, both today and in 
the colonization of land. What evidence supports the antiq-
uity of mycorrhizal associations?
3. WHAT IF? If fungi colonized land before plants, where 
might the fungi have lived? How would their food sources 
have differed from what they feed on today?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 31.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   714 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 716 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 715
Rozella spores
Hypha of
host fungus
. Figure 31.11 The cryptomycete Rozella allomycis 
parasitizing another fungus.
1 om
. Figure 31.12 A spore of the microsporidian  
Fibrillanosema crangonycis. (TEM)
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
Cryptomycetes and Microsporidians
Genomic studies indicate that 
cryptomycetes (fungi in the 
phylum Cryptomycota) and 
microsporidians (fungi in the 
phylum Microsporidia) form a 
sister group and are a basal fungal 
lineage (see Figure 31.10). While most molecular comparisons 
support the placement of cryptomycetes and microsporidians 
at the base of the fungal tree, more data are needed to help 
resolve this phylogeny.
Cryptomycetes
Although only 30 species have been identified to date, 
genetic data suggest that the cryptomycetes are a large and 
diverse group. DNA sequences from members of this group 
have been found in marine and freshwater communities, as 
well as soils. Cryptomycetes also have been found in aerobic 
and anaerobic environments, and in geographical locations 
across the globe. Like the species shown in Figure 31.11, 
Rozella allomycis, many of the cryptomycetes identified to 
date are parasites of protists and other fungi.
Flagellum
4 om
c Figure 31.13  
Flagellated 
chytrid 
zoospore.  
(TEM)
 Mastering Biology Video: Phlyctochytrium Zoospore Release
small genomes, with only 2,000 genes in some species. The 
genome of one microsporidian, Encephalitozoon intestinalis, 
has just 2.3 Mb of DNA—the smallest genome of any eukary-
ote sequenced to date. Unlike other basal fungi, microspo-
ridians lack flagellated spores; instead, they produce unique 
spores that infect host cells via a harpoon-like organelle.
Chytrids
The fungi classified in phylum 
Chytridiomycota, called chytrids, 
are ubiquitous in lakes and soil; 
recent metagenomic studies have 
uncovered new clades of chytrids 
in hydrothermal vent and other 
marine communities. Some of the approximately 1,000 chytrid 
species are decomposers, while others are parasites of protists, 
other fungi, plants, or animals; as we’ll see later in the chapter, 
two chytrid parasites have contributed to the global decline of 
amphibian populations. Still other chytrids are important mutu-
alists. For example, anaerobic chytrids that live in the digestive 
tracts of sheep and cattle help to break down plant matter, 
thereby contributing significantly to the animal’s growth.
Nearly all chytrids have flagellated spores, called zoospores 
(Figure 31.13). Like other fungi, chytrids have cell walls made of 
chitin, and they also share certain key enzymes and metabolic 
pathways with other fungal groups. Some chytrids form colo-
nies with hyphae, while others exist as single spherical cells.
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
ChytridsChytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
Cryptomycetes are unicellular and have flagellated spores. 
Cryptomycetes also can synthesize a chitin-rich cell wall, a 
key structural feature of the fungi (see Concept 31.1).
Microsporidians
The 1,300 species of microsporidians are unicellular parasites 
of protists and animals, including humans (Figure 31.12). 
Infections in humans can cause reduced longevity and 
weight loss. The microsporidian Nosema ceranae is a parasite 
of honeybees and may contribute to Colony Collapse Disorder, 
a devastating outbreak that has led to the loss of honeybee 
colonies throughout the world.
Like all fungi, microsporidians can synthesize a chitin-rich 
cell wall. Other aspects of their biology are unusual. For exam-
ple, microsporidians have highly reduced mitochondria and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   715 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 717 ===

716 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Zoopagomycetes
Most of the 900 species of 
zoopagomycetes, fungi in the 
phylum Zoopagomycota, live as 
parasites or as commensal (neutral) 
symbionts of animals; some are 
parasites of other fungi or protists. 
Zoopagomycetes form filamentous hyphae and reproduce 
asexually by producing nonflagellated spores. Some zoopago-
mycetes induce insects that they parasitize to perch near the 
top of plants; the insects subsequently die and fungal spores 
are released to infect new victims (Figure 31.14). Sexual 
reproduction, where known, involves the formation of a 
durable structure called a zygosporangium, which houses and 
protects the zygote.
The loss of flagellated spores in the zoopagomycetes 
and other fungal lineages may have been associated with a 
Rhizopus
growing
on bread
Gametangia with
haploid nuclei
Diploid
nuclei
Zygosporangium
Dispersal and
germination
Mycelium
Sporangia
Young
zygosporangium
(heterokaryotic)
Mating
type (+)
Dispersal and
germination
Sporangium
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
PLASMOGAMY
KARYOGAMY
MEIOSIS
Mating
type (–)
100 om
50 om
     Mycelia have various
mating types (here designated (–), 
with red nuclei, and (+), with 
blue nuclei).
1      Neighboring mycelia of different
mating types form hyphal extensions
(gametangia), each of which encloses
several haploid nuclei.
2
     A zygosporangium 
forms, containing 
multiple haploid nuclei
from the two parents.
3
     The zygosporangium
develops a rough,
thick-walled coating
that can resist harsh
conditions for months.
4
     When conditions are
favorable, karyogamy
occurs, then meiosis.
5
     The zygosporangium 
germinates into a
sporangium on a short stalk.
6
     The sporangium 
disperses genetically 
diverse haploid spores.
7
     The spores 
germinate and 
grow into new 
mycelia.
8
     Mycelia can also reproduce 
asexually by forming sporangia 
that produce genetically 
identical haploid spores.
9
Haploid (n)
Heterokaryotic (n + n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
. Figure 31.15 The life cycle of the mucoromycete Rhizopus stolonifer (black bread mold).
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
b Figure 31.14  
A fly covered with 
fungal hyphae. 
This fly was killed by 
the zoopagomycete 
Entomophthora 
muscae, also known 
as the “fly death 
fungus,” for obvious 
reasons.
transition to life on land. Basal fungal lineages had flagellated 
spores, enabling dispersal through water. In contrast, zoopago-
mycetes and all of their closest fungal relatives (the clade 
consisting of the mucoromycetes, ascomycetes, and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   716 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 718 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 717
basidiomycetes; see Figure 31.10) have nonflagellated spores, 
which are dispersed by wind in terrestrial fungi.
Mucoromycetes
There are approximately 
750 known species of 
mucoromycetes, fungi in the 
phylum Mucoromycota. This 
phylum includes species of fast-
growing molds responsible for 
causing foods such as bread, peaches, strawberries, and sweet 
potatoes to rot during storage. Although some mucoromy-
cetes are decomposers, most are associated with plants. Many 
mucoromycetes live as parasites or pathogens of plants, while 
others live as mutualists (including some mycorrhizae).
The life cycle of Rhizopus stolonifer (black bread mold) is 
fairly typical of mucoromycete species (Figure 31.15). Its 
hyphae spread out over the food surface, penetrate it, and 
absorb nutrients. The hyphae are coenocytic, with septa 
found only where reproductive cells are formed. In the 
asexual phase, bulbous black sporangia develop at the tips 
of upright hyphae. Within each sporangium, hundreds of 
genetically identical haploid spores develop and are dispersed 
through the air. Spores that happen to land on moist food 
germinate, growing into new mycelia.
If environmental conditions deteriorate—for instance, 
if the mold consumes all its food—Rhizopus may reproduce 
sexually. The parents in a sexual union are mycelia of different 
mating types, which possess different chemical markers but 
may appear identical. Plasmogamy produces a sturdy structure 
called a zygosporangium (plural, zygosporangia), in which 
karyogamy and then meiosis occur. Note that while a zygospo-
rangium represents the zygote (2n) stage in the life cycle, it is 
not a zygote in the usual sense (that is, a cell with one diploid 
nucleus). Rather, a zygosporangium is a multinucleate struc-
ture, first heterokaryotic with many haploid nuclei from the 
two parents, then with many diploid nuclei after karyogamy.
Zygosporangia are resistant to freezing and drying and are 
metabolically inactive. When conditions improve, the nuclei 
of the zygosporangium undergo meiosis, the zygosporangium 
germinates into a sporangium, and the sporangium releases 
genetically diverse haploid spores that may colonize a new 
substrate. Some mucoromycetes can actually “aim” and then 
shoot their sporangia toward bright light. Figure 31.16 shows 
one example, Pilobolus, which  decomposes animal dung. 
Its sporebearing hyphae bend toward light, where there are 
likely to be openings in the vegetation through which spores 
may reach fresh grass. The fungus then launches its sporangia 
in a jet of water that can travel up to 2.5 m. Grazing animals 
ingest the fungi with the grass and then scatter the spores in 
feces, thereby enabling the next generation of fungi to grow.
Finally, the phylum Mucoromycota also includes the 
glomeromycetes, a clade of fungi that form arbuscular 
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
1 mm
c Figure 31.16  
Pilobolus aiming 
its sporangia. 
mycorrhizae (see Figure 31.4b and Figure 37.14). The tips of 
the hyphae that push into plant root cells branch into tiny 
treelike arbuscules. About 85% of all plant species have mutu-
alistic partnerships with arbuscular mycorrhizae.
Ascomycetes
Mycologists have described 90,000 
species of ascomycetes, fungi in the 
phylum Ascomycota, from a wide 
variety of marine, freshwater, and ter-
restrial habitats. The defining feature 
of ascomycetes is the production of 
spores (called ascospores) in saclike asci (singular, ascus); thus, 
they are commonly called sac fungi. During their sexual stage, 
most ascomycetes develop fruiting bodies, called ascocarps, 
which range in size from microscopic to macroscopic 
(Figure 31.17). The ascocarps contain the spore-forming asci.
Ascomycetes vary in size and complexity from unicellular 
yeasts to elaborate cup fungi and morels (see Figure 31.17). 
They include some of the most devastating plant pathogens, 
which we will discuss later. However, many ascomycetes are 
important decomposers, particularly of plant material. More 
than 25% of all ascomycete species live with green algae or 
cyanobacteria in beneficial symbiotic associations called 
lichens. Some ascomycetes form mycorrhizae with plants. 
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
The edible ascocarp of Morchella 
esculenta, the tasty morel, is often 
found under trees in orchards.
Tuber melanosporum is a truffle 
species that forms ectomycorrhi-
zae with trees. The ascocarp 
grows underground and emits 
a strong odor. These 
ascocarps have 
been dug up 
and the 
middle one 
sliced open.
b
c
. Figure 31.17 Ascomycetes (sac fungi).
? Ascomycetes vary greatly in morphology (see also Figure 31.10). How 
could you confirm that a fungus is an ascomycete?
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   717 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 719 ===

718 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
conidiophores, often in clusters or long chains, from which 
they may be dispersed by the wind.
Conidia may also be involved in sexual reproduction, 
fusing with hyphae from a mycelium of a different mating 
type, as occurs in Neurospora. Fusion of two different mating 
types is followed by plasmogamy, resulting in the formation 
of dikaryotic cells, each with two haploid nuclei represent-
ing the two parents. The cells at the tips of these dikaryotic 
hyphae develop into many asci. Within each ascus, karyog-
amy combines the two parental genomes, and then meiosis 
forms four genetically different nuclei. This is usually fol-
lowed by a mitotic division, forming eight ascospores. The 
Many others live between mesophyll cells in leaves; some of 
these species release toxic compounds that help protect the 
plant from insects.
Although the life cycles of various ascomycete groups 
differ in the details of their reproductive structures and pro-
cesses, we’ll illustrate some common elements using the 
bread mold Neurospora crassa (Figure 31.18). Ascomycetes 
reproduce asexually by producing enormous numbers of 
asexual spores called conidia (singular, conidium). Unlike the 
asexual spores of most mucoromycetes, in most ascomycetes, 
conidia are not formed inside sporangia. Rather, they are 
produced externally at the tips of specialized hyphae called 
Haploid (n)
Dikaryotic (n + n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
Conidia;
mating type (–)
Ascus
(dikaryotic)
Dikaryotic
hyphae
(n + n)
PLASMOGAMY
KARYOGAMY
MEIOSIS
Diploid nucleus
(zygote; 2n)
Eight
ascospores
Ascocarp
Dispersal
Dispersal
Mycelia
(n)
Ascospores (n)
Mycelium
Hypha
Mating
type (+)
Germination
Germination
Asci
Four
haploid
nuclei (n)
Conidiophore
      The ascospores
are discharged forcibly
from the asci through an
opening in the ascocarp.
Germinating ascospores
give rise to new mycelia.
7
     Ascomycete mycelia 
can reproduce asexually 
by producing pigmented
haploid spores (conidia).
1      Neurospora can also reproduce 
sexually by producing specialized 
hyphae. Conidia of the opposite
mating type fuse to these hyphae. 
2
     The dikaryotic hyphae
that result from
plasmogamy produce
many dikaryotic asci, two
of which are shown here.
3
     Karyogamy 
occurs within each 
ascus, producing a 
diploid nucleus.
4
     Each diploid nucleus 
divides by meiosis, yielding 
four haploid nuclei.
5     Each haploid nucleus divides once by 
mitosis, yielding eight nuclei. Cell walls 
and plasma membranes develop around 
the nuclei, forming ascospores (LM).
6      Each diploid nucleus 
divides by meiosis, yielding 
four haploid nuclei.
. Figure 31.18 The life cycle of Neurospora crassa, an ascomycete. Neurospora is a bread mold 
and research organism that also grows in the wild on burned vegetation.
VISUAL SKILLS What is the ploidy of a cell in the specialized hypha shown in 2?
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   718 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 720 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 719
Basidiomycetes are important decomposers of wood and 
other plant material. Of all the fungi, certain basidiomycetes 
are the best at decomposing the complex polymer lignin, an 
abundant component of wood. Many shelf fungi break down 
the wood of weak or damaged trees and continue to decom-
pose the wood after the tree dies.
The life cycle of a basidiomycete usually includes a long-
lived dikaryotic mycelium. As in ascomycetes, this extended 
dikaryotic stage provides many opportunities for genetic 
recombination events, in effect multiplying the result of a 
single mating. Periodically, in response to environmental 
stimuli, the mycelium reproduces sexually by producing 
ascospores develop in and are eventually discharged from 
the ascocarp.
Compared to the life cycle of mucoromycetes, the 
extended dikaryotic stage of ascomycetes (and also basidio-
mycetes) provides additional opportunities for genetic recom-
bination. In Neurospora, for example, many dikaryotic cells 
can develop into asci. The haploid nuclei in these asci fuse, 
and their genomes then recombine during meiosis, result-
ing in a multitude of genetically different offspring from one 
mating event (see steps 3–5 in Figure 31.18).
As described in Figure 17.2, biologists in the 1930s used 
Neurospora in research that led to the one gene–one enzyme 
hypothesis. Today, this ascomycete continues to serve 
as a model research organism. In 2003, its entire genome 
was published. This tiny fungus has about three-fourths 
as many genes as the fruit fly Drosophila and about half as 
many as a human (Table 31.1). The Neurospora genome 
is relatively compact, having few of the stretches of non-
coding DNA that occupy so much space in the genomes 
of humans and many other eukaryotes. In fact, there is 
evidence that Neurospora has a genomic defense system 
that prevents noncoding DNA such as transposons from 
accumulating.
Cryptomycetes
Microsporidians
Chytrids
Zoopagomycetes
Mucoromycetes
Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes
Table 31.1  Comparison of Gene Density in Neurospora, 
Drosophila, and Homo sapiens
Genome 
Size (million 
base pairs)
Number 
of Genes
Gene Density 
(genes per million 
base pairs)
Neurospora 
crassa 
(ascomycete 
fungus)
41 9,700 236
Drosophila 
melanogaster 
(fruit fly)
165 14,000 85
Homo sapiens 
(human)
3,000 <21,000 7
 c Maiden veil fungus 
(Dictyphora), a 
fungus with an odor 
like rotting meat
b Puffballs emitting 
spores
c Shelf fungi, 
important 
decomposers 
of wood 
. Figure 31.19 Basidiomycetes (club fungi).
Basidiomycetes
About 50,000 species, including 
mushrooms, puffballs, and shelf 
fungi, are called basidiomycetes 
and are classified in the phylum 
Basidiomycota (Figure 31.19). This 
phylum also includes mutualists 
that form mycorrhizae and two groups of destructive plant 
parasites: rusts and smuts. The name of the phylum derives 
from the basidium (plural, basidia; Latin for “little pedes-
tals”), a cell in which karyogamy occurs, followed immedi-
ately by meiosis. The club-like shape of the basidium also 
gives rise to the common name club fungus.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   719 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 721 ===

720 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
elaborate fruiting bodies called basidiocarps (Figure 31.20). 
The common white mushrooms in the supermarket are famil-
iar examples of a basidiocarp.
By concentrating growth in the hyphae of mushrooms, 
a basidiomycete mycelium can erect its fruiting structures 
in just a few hours; a mushroom pops up as it absorbs water 
and as cytoplasm streams in from the dikaryotic mycelium. 
By this process, in some species a ring of mushrooms, popu-
larly called a “fairy ring,” may appear literally overnight 
(Figure 31.21). The mycelium below the fairy ring expands 
outward at a rate of about 30 cm per year, decomposing 
organic matter in the soil as it grows. Some giant fairy rings 
are produced by mycelia that are centuries old.
After a mushroom forms, its cap supports and protects a 
large surface area of dikaryotic basidia on gills. During kary-
ogamy, the two nuclei in each basidium fuse, producing a 
diploid nucleus (see Figure 31.20). This nucleus then under-
goes meiosis, yielding four haploid nuclei, each of which 
ultimately develops into a basidiospore. Large numbers of 
basidiospores are produced: The gills of a common white 
mushroom have a surface area of about 200 cm2 and may 
drop a billion basidiospores, which blow away.
     A dikaryotic mycelium forms,
growing faster than, and ultimately 
crowding out, the haploid parental mycelia.
Basidiospores
(n)
Dispersal
and 
germination
Haploid
mycelia
Mating
type (–)
Mating
type (+)
Dikaryotic
mycelium
Gills lined
with basidia
Basidiocarp
(n + n)
Basidia
(n + n)
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
Basidium with
four basidiospores
Basidium containing
four haploid nuclei
Diploid
nuclei
PLASMOGAMY
KARYOGAMY
MEIOSIS
Basidium
1 om Basidiospore
      When mature, 
the basidiospores 
are ejected and 
then dispersed 
by the wind.
7
      In a suitable 
environment, the 
basidiospores 
germinate and 
grow into 
short-lived 
haploid mycelia.
8
1     Two haploid mycelia 
of different mating types 
undergo plasmogamy.
2
     Environmental cues 
such as rain or change in 
temperature induce the 
dikaryotic mycelium to 
form compact masses 
that develop into 
basidiocarps (mushrooms,
in this case).
3
     The basidiocarp 
gills are lined with 
terminal dikaryotic 
cells called basidia.
4
     Karyogamy in each 
basidium produces a 
diploid nucleus, which 
then undergoes meiosis.
5
     Each diploid nucleus 
yields four haploid 
nuclei, each of which 
develops into a 
basidiospore (SEM). 
6
Haploid (n)
Dikaryotic (n + n)
Diploid (2n)
Key
. Figure 31.20 The life cycle 
of a mushroom-forming 
basidiomycete.
VISUAL SKILLS Use the diagram to determine the ploidy of a cell in the aboveground stalk of a mushroom.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Life Cycle of a Mushroom
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   720 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 722 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 721
nutrients from a host organism, but they reciprocate  with 
actions that benefit the host—as we already saw for the key 
mycorrhizal associations that fungi form with most vascular 
plants. We turn now to other examples of mutualistic fungi.
Fungus-Plant Mutualisms
All plant species studied to date appear to harbor symbi-
otic endophytes, fungi (or bacteria) that live inside leaves 
or other plant parts without causing harm. Most fungal 
endophytes identified to date are ascomycetes but some are 
mucoromycetes. Fungal endophytes benefit certain grasses 
and other nonwoody plants by making toxins that deter her-
bivores or by increasing host plant tolerance of heat, drought, 
or heavy metals. As described in Figure 31.22, researchers 
. Figure 31.21 A fairy ring. According to legend, mushroom 
rings spring up where fairies have danced on a moonlit night. The 
text provides a biological explanation of how these rings form.
CONCEPT CHECK 31.4
1. What feature of chytrids supports the hypothesis that they 
include members of basal fungal lineages?
2. Give examples of how form fits function in mucoromycetes, 
ascomycetes, and basidiomycetes.
3. WHAT IF? Suppose that the mutation of an ascomycete 
changed its life cycle so that plasmogamy, karyogamy, and 
meiosis occurred in quick succession. How might this affect 
the ascospores and ascocarps?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Fungi play key roles in nutrient 
cycling, ecological interactions, 
and human welfare
In our survey of fungal classification, we’ve touched on some 
of the ways fungi influence other organisms. We will now 
look more closely at these impacts, focusing on how fungi act 
as decomposers, mutualists, and pathogens.
Fungi as Decomposers
Fungi are well adapted as decomposers of organic material, 
including the cellulose and lignin of plant cell walls. In fact, 
almost any carbon-containing substrate—even jet fuel and 
house paint—can be consumed by at least some fungi. The 
same is true of bacteria. As a result, fungi and bacteria are pri-
marily responsible for keeping ecosystems stocked with the 
inorganic nutrients essential for plant growth. Without these 
decomposers, carbon, nitrogen, and other elements would 
remain tied up in organic matter. If that were to happen, 
plants and the animals that eat them could not exist because 
elements taken from the soil would not be returned. Without 
decomposers, life as we know it would cease.
Fungi as Mutualists
Fungi may form mutualistic relationships with plants, 
algae, cyanobacteria, and animals. Mutualistic fungi absorb 
CONCEPT 31.5
Experiment Fungal endophytes are symbiotic fungi found 
within the bodies of all plants examined to date. Researchers 
tested whether fungal endophytes benefit the cacao tree 
(Theobroma cacao). This tree, whose name means “food of 
the gods” in Greek, is the source of the beans used to make 
chocolate, and it is cultivated throughout the tropics. A 
particular mixture of fungal endophytes was added to the 
leaves of some cacao seedlings, but not others. (In cacao, 
fungal endophytes colonize leaves after the seedling germi-
nates.) The seedlings were then inoculated with a virulent 
pathogen, the protist Phytophthora.
Results F e w e r  l e a v e s  w e r e  k i l l e d  b y  t h e  p a t h o g e n  i n  s e e d-
lings with fungal endophytes than in seedlings without en-
dophytes. Among leaves that survived, pathogens damaged 
less of the leaf surface area in seedlings with endophytes 
than in seedlings without endophytes.
Endophyte not present; pathogen present (E–P+)
Both endophyte and pathogen present (E+P+)
Leaf mortality (%)
0
30
20
10
E–P+ E+P+
Leaf area damaged (%)0
15
10
5
E–P+ E+P+
Conclusion T h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  e n d o p h y t e s  a p p e a r s  t o  b e n-
efit cacao trees by reducing the leaf mortality and damage 
caused by Phytophthora.
Data from A. E. Arnold et al., Fungal endophytes limit pathogen damage in a 
tropical tree, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100:15649–
15654 (2003).
WHAT IF? The researchers also performed control treatments. 
Suggest two controls they might have used, and explain how each 
would be helpful in interpreting the results described here.
Do fungal endophytes benefit a woody plant?
/uni25BC Figure 31.22 Inquiry
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   721 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 723 ===

722 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
glomeromycete and basidiomycete lichens are known. Recent 
studies have found that many lichens also have a basidiomy-
cete yeast as a second fungal component. As the role of these 
yeasts remains unknown, our discussion will focus on the 
primary fungal partner.
The fungus usually gives a lichen its overall shape and 
structure, and tissues formed by hyphae account for most 
of the lichen’s mass. The cells of the alga or cyanobacterium 
generally occupy an inner layer below the lichen surface 
(Figure 31.25). The merger of fungus and alga or cyano-
bacterium is so complete that lichens are given scientific 
names as though they were single organisms. As might be 
expected of such “dual organisms,” asexual reproduction 
as a symbiotic unit is common. This can occur either by 
fragmentation of the parental lichen or by the formation 
of soredia (singular, soredium), small clusters of hyphae 
with embedded algae (see Figure 31.25). The fungi of many 
lichens also reproduce sexually.
In most lichens, each partner provides something the 
other could not obtain on its own. The alga or cyanobac-
terium provides carbon compounds; a cyanobacterium 
also fixes nitrogen (see Concept 27.3) and provides organic 
studying how fungal endophytes affect a woody plant tested 
whether leaf endophytes benefit seedlings of the cacao tree, 
Theobroma cacao. Their findings show that the fungal endo-
phytes of woody flowering plants can play an important role 
in defending against pathogens.
Fungus-Animal Mutualisms
As mentioned earlier, some fungi share their digestive ser -
vices with animals, helping break down plant material in 
the guts of cattle and other grazing mammals. Many spe-
cies of ants take advantage of the digestive power of fungi 
by raising them in “farms.” Leaf-cutter ants, for example, 
scour tropical forests in search of leaves, which they can -
not digest on their own but carry back to their nests and 
feed to the fungi (Figure 31.23). As the fungi grow, their 
hyphae develop specialized swollen tips that are rich in 
proteins and carbohydrates. The ants feed primarily on 
these nutrient-rich tips. Not only do the fungi break down 
plant leaves into substances the insects can digest, but 
they also detoxify plant defensive compounds that would 
otherwise kill or harm the ants. In some tropical forests, 
the fungi have helped these insects become the major 
 c o n s u m e r s  o f  l e a v e s .
The evolution of such farmer ants and that of their fungal 
“crops” have been tightly linked for over 50 million years. 
The fungi have become so dependent on their caretakers that 
in many cases they can no longer survive without the ants, 
and vice versa.
Lichens
A lichen is a symbiotic association between a photosynthetic 
microorganism and a fungus in which millions of photosyn-
thetic cells are held in a mass of fungal hyphae. Lichens grow 
on the surfaces of rocks, rotting logs, trees, and roofs in vari-
ous forms (Figure 31.24). The photosynthetic partners are 
unicellular or filamentous green algae or cyanobacteria. The 
fungal component is most often an ascomycete, but some 
. Figure 31.23 Fungus-gardening insects. These leaf-cutting 
ants depend on fungi to convert plant material to a form the insects 
can digest. The fungi, in turn, depend on the nutrients from the 
leaves the ants feed them.
b Crustose 
(encrusting) 
lichens
c A foliose 
(leaflike) 
lichen
b A fruticose 
(shrublike) 
lichen
. Figure 31.24 Variation in lichen growth forms.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   722 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 724 ===

 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 723
fruit harvest is lost annually due 
to fungi, and grain crops also suf-
fer major losses each year.
Some fungi that attack food 
crops produce compounds that 
are toxic to humans. One exam-
ple is the ascomycete Claviceps 
purpurea, which grows on rye 
plants, forming purple structures 
called ergots (see Figure 31.26c). 
If infected rye is milled into 
flour, toxins from the ergots can 
cause ergotism, characterized by 
gangrene, nervous spasms, burn-
ing sensations, hallucinations, 
and temporary insanity. An epi-
demic of ergotism around 944 !" 
killed up to 40,000 people in 
France. One compound that has 
been isolated from ergots is lysergic acid, the raw material 
from which the hallucinogen LSD is made.
Although animals are less susceptible to parasitic fungi 
than are plants, about 1,000 fungi are known to parasitize 
animals. Two such parasites, the chytrids Batrachochytrium 
dendrobatidis (discovered in 1998) and B. salamandrivorans 
(discovered in 2013; this species primarily attacks sala-
manders), have been implicated in the recent decline or 
extinction of 500 species of frogs and other amphibians. 
These chytrids can cause severe skin infections, leading 
nitrogen compounds. The fungus provides its photosynthetic 
partner with a suitable environment for growth. The physi-
cal arrangement of hyphae allows for gas exchange, protects 
the photosynthetic partner, and retains water and minerals, 
most of which are absorbed from airborne dust or from rain. 
The fungus also secretes acids, which aid in the uptake of 
minerals.
Lichens are important pioneers on cleared rock and 
soil surfaces, such as volcanic flows and burned forests. 
They break down the surface by physically penetrating 
and chemically attacking it, and they trap windblown soil. 
Nitrogen-fixing lichens also add organic nitrogen to some 
ecosystems. These processes make it possible for a succes-
sion of plants to grow. Fossils show that lichens were on 
land 420 million years ago. These early lichens may have 
modified rocks and soil much as they do today, helping 
pave the way for plants.
Fungi as Parasites
Like mutualistic fungi, parasitic fungi absorb nutrients 
from the cells of living hosts, but they provide no ben-
efits in return. About 30% of the 145,000 known species 
of fungi make a living as parasites or pathogens, mostly of 
plants (Figure 31.26). An example of a plant pathogen is 
Cryphonectria parasitica, the ascomycete fungus that causes 
chestnut blight, which dramatically changed the landscape 
of the northeastern United States. Accidentally introduced 
via trees imported from Asia in the early 1900s, spores of the 
fungus entered cracks in the bark of American chestnut trees 
and produced hyphae, killing many trees. The once-common 
chestnuts now survive mainly as sprouts from the stumps of 
former trees. Another ascomycete, Fusarium circinatum, causes 
pine pitch canker, a disease that threatens pines throughout 
the world. In addition, between 10% and 50% of the world’s 
Ascocarp of fungus
Soredia
Fungal
hyphae Algal
layer
Fungal hyphae
Algal cell
50 om
c Figure 31.25 Anatomy 
of an ascomycete lichen. 
(colorized SEM)
(a)Corn smut on corn
(b)Tar spot 
fungus 
on maple 
leaves
(c) Ergots on rye
. Figure 31.26 Examples of fungal diseases of plants.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   723 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 725 ===

724 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
in the lungs. Each year, hundreds of cases in North America 
require treatment with antifungal drugs, without which the 
disease could be fatal.
Some mycoses are opportunistic, occurring only when 
a change in the body’s microorganisms, chemical environ-
ment, or immune system allows fungi to grow unchecked. 
Candida albicans, for example, is one of the normal inhabit-
ants of moist epithelia, such as the vaginal lining. Under 
certain circumstances, C. albicans can grow too rapidly and 
become pathogenic, leading to so-called “yeast infections.” 
A related species, C. auris, has emerged as a global threat, 
often in healthcare facilities. Resistant to multiple antifun-
gal drugs, this species can infect the bloodstream and cause 
 life-threatening infections.
Practical Uses of Fungi
The dangers posed by fungi should not overshadow their 
immense benefits. We depend on their ecological services 
as decomposers and recyclers of organic matter. In addition, 
mushrooms are not the only fungi of interest for human 
consumption. Fungi are used to ripen Roquefort and other 
blue cheeses. Morels and truffles, the edible fruiting bodies 
of various ascomycetes, are highly prized for their complex 
flavors (see Figure 31.17). These fungi can sell for hundreds 
to thousands of dollars a pound. Truffles release strong 
odors that attract mammals and insects, which in nature 
feed on them and disperse their spores. In some cases, the 
odors mimic the pheromones (sex attractants) of certain 
mammals. For example, the odors of several European 
truffles mimic the pheromones released by male pigs, which 
explains why truffle hunters sometimes use female pigs to 
help find these delicacies.
Humans have used yeasts to produce alcoholic beverages 
and bread for thousands of years. Under anaerobic condi-
tions, yeasts ferment sugars to alcohol and CO2, which 
causes dough to rise. Only relatively recently have the yeasts 
involved been separated into pure cultures for more con-
trolled use. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the most 
important of all cultured fungi (see Figure 31.7). It is available 
as many strains of baker’s yeast and brewer’s yeast.
Many fungi have great medical value as well. For exam-
ple, a compound extracted from ergots is used to reduce 
high blood pressure and to stop maternal bleeding after 
childbirth. Some fungi produce antibiotics that are effective 
in treating bacterial infections. In fact, the first antibiotic 
discovered was penicillin, made by the ascomycete mold 
Penicillium. Other examples of pharmaceuticals derived 
from fungi include cholesterol-lowering drugs and cyclo-
sporine, a drug used to suppress the immune system after 
organ transplants.
Fungi also figure prominently in basic research. For exam-
ple, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is used to study the 
to massive die-offs (Figure 31.27). Field observations and 
studies of museum specimens show that B. dendrobatidis 
and B. salamandrivorans first appeared in amphibian popu-
lations shortly before their declines in Australia, Costa 
Rica, Germany, the United States, and other countries. 
Genetic analyses indicate that both B. dendrobatidis and 
B. salamandrivorans originated in Asia and spread from there 
via the commercial trade of frogs and salamanders.
The general term for an infection in an animal by a fun -
gal parasite is mycosis. In humans, skin mycoses include 
the disease ringworm, so named because it appears as 
circular red areas on the skin. Most commonly, the asco -
mycetes that cause ringworm grow on the feet, causing 
the intense itching and blisters known as athlete’s foot. 
Though highly contagious, athlete’s foot and other ring -
worm infections can be treated with fungicidal lotions 
and powders.
Systemic mycoses, by contrast, spread through the body 
and usually cause very serious illnesses. They are typically 
caused by inhaled spores. For example, coccidioidomycosis is 
a systemic mycosis that produces tuberculosis-like symptoms 
2004
2005
2006
2007 2008
California
Sixty
Lake
Basin
Boundary of chytrid spread
Lake status in 2009:
Key
m Yellow-legged frogs killed by 
B. dendrobatidis infectionN
Frog population extinct
Treatment lake: frogs
treated with fungicides
and released
. Figure 31.27 Amphibians under attack. The number of 
yellow-legged frogs (Rana muscosa) plummeted after the chytrid 
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis reached the Sixty Lake Basin area 
of California. In the years leading up to the chytrid’s 2004 arrival, 
there had been more than 2,300 frogs in these lakes. By 2009, 
only 38 frogs remained; all the survivors were in two lakes (yellow) 
where frogs had been treated with a fungicide to reduce the 
chytrid’s impact.
INTERPRET THE DATA Do the data depicted indicate that the 
chytrid caused or is correlated to the drop in frog numbers? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   724 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 726 ===

molecular genetics of eukaryotes because its cells are easy to 
culture and manipulate. Scientists are gaining insight into the 
genes involved in Parkinson’s disease by examining the func-
tions of homologous genes in S. cerevisiae.
Genetically modified fungi also hold much promise. For 
example, scientists have succeeded in engineering a strain of 
S. cerevisiae that produces human glycoproteins, including 
 i n s u l i n - l i k e  g r o w t h  f a c t o r .  S u c h  f u n g u s - p r o d u c e d  g l y c o p r o-
teins have the potential to treat people with medical condi-
tions that prevent them from producing these compounds. 
Meanwhile, other researchers are sequencing the genome of 
Gliocladium roseum, an ascomycete that can grow on wood or 
agricultural waste and that naturally produces hydrocarbons 
similar to those in diesel fuel (Figure 31.28). They hope to deci-
pher the metabolic pathways by which G. roseum synthesizes 
hydrocarbons, with the goal of harnessing those pathways to 
produce biofuels without reducing land area for growing food 
crops (as occurs when ethanol is produced from corn).
Having now completed our survey of the kingdom Fungi, 
we will turn in the rest of this unit to the closely related king-
dom Animalia, to which we humans belong.
c Figure 31.28 Can 
this fungus be used 
to produce biofuels? 
The ascomycete 
Gliocladium roseum can 
produce hydrocarbons 
similar to those in diesel 
fuel (colorized SEM).
1. Describe the mutualistic relationship between leaf-cutter 
ants and fungi.
2. How can a benign fungus residing in the human body turn 
into a pathogenic one?
3. WHAT IF? How might life on Earth differ from what we 
know today if no mutualistic relationships between fungi 
and other organisms had ever evolved?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 31.5
31 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
intervening heterokaryotic stage in which cells have hap-
loid nuclei from two parents. The diploid cells resulting from 
karyogamy are short-lived and undergo meiosis, producing 
genetically diverse haploid spores.
• Many fungi can reproduce asexually as filamentous fungi or 
yeasts.
DRAW IT Draw a generalized fungal life cycle, labeling asexual and 
sexual reproduction, meiosis, plasmogamy, karyogamy, and the points in 
the cycle when spores and the zygote are produced.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 31.2
Fungi produce spores through sexual or asexual life 
cycles (pp. 711–713)
• In fungi, the sexual life cycle involves cytoplasmic fusion 
(plasmogamy) and nuclear fusion (karyogamy), with an 
CONCEPT 31.3
The ancestor of fungi was an aquatic, single-celled, 
flagellated protist (pp. 713–714)
• Molecular evidence indicates that fungi and animals diverged 
over a billion years ago from a common unicellular ancestor that 
had a flagellum. However, the oldest fossils that are widely ac-
cepted as fungi are 440 million years old.
• Chytrids and other basal fungal lineages have flagellated spores.
• Fungi were among the earliest colonizers of land; fossil evidence 
indicates that these colonizers included species that were symbi-
onts with early plants.
? Did multicellularity originate independently in fungi and animals? 
Explain.
CONCEPT 31.1
Fungi are heterotrophs that feed by absorption  
(pp. 709–711)
• All fungi (including decomposers and symbionts) are hetero-
trophs that acquire nutrients by absorption. Many fungi secrete 
enzymes that break down complex molecules.
• Most fungi grow as thin, multicellular filaments called hyphae; 
relatively few species grow only as single-celled yeasts. In 
their multicellular form, fungi consist of mycelia, networks of 
branched hyphae adapted for absorption. Mycorrhizal fungi have 
specialized hyphae that enable them to form a mutually benefi-
cial relationship with plants.
? How does the morphology of multicellular fungi affect the efficiency 
of nutrient absorption?
 CHAPTER 31  Introduction to Fungi 725
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   725 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 727 ===

Fungi have radiated into a diverse set of lineages  
(pp. 714–721)
Fungal Phylum Distinguishing Features
Cryptomycota 
(cryptomycetes)
Parasites with  
flagellated spores
Microsporidia
(microsporidians)
Parasitic cells that form  
resistant spores
Chytridiomycota
(chytrids)
Flagellated spores
Zoopagomycota 
(zoopagomycetes)
Resistant zygosporangium  
as sexual stage
Mucuromycota 
(mucuromycetes)
Include fungi that form  
arbuscular mycorrhizae  
with plants
Ascomycota 
(ascomycetes)
Sexual spores (ascospores) borne  
internally in sacs called asci; vast  
numbers of asexual spores  
(conidia) produced
Basidiomycota 
(basidiomycetes)
Elaborate fruiting body  
(basidiocarp) containing  
many basidia that produce  
sexual spores (basidiospores)
DRAW IT Draw a phylogenetic tree of the major groups of fungi.
CONCEPT 31.4
Fungi play key roles in nutrient cycling, ecological 
interactions, and human welfare (pp. 721–725)
• Fungi perform essential recycling of chemical elements between 
the living and nonliving world.
• Lichens are highly integrated symbiotic associations of fungi 
and algae or cyanobacteria.
• Many fungi are parasites, mostly of plants.
• Humans use fungi for food and to make antibiotics.
? How are fungi important as decomposers, mutualists, and pathogens?
CONCEPT 31.5
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Data from R. S. Redman et al., Thermotolerance generated by plant/fungal  
symbiosis, Science 298:1581 (2002).
Soil Temp.Curvularia 1 or 2Plant Mass (g) No. of New Shoots
30°C E- 16.2 32
E+ 22.8 60
35°C E- 21.7 43
E+ 28.4 60
40°C E- 8.8 10
E+ 22.2 37
45°C E- 0 0
E+ 15.1 24
6. EVOLUTION CONNECTION The fungus-alga symbiosis that 
makes up a lichen is thought to have evolved multiple times 
independently in different fungal groups. However, lichens 
fall into three well-defined growth forms (see Figure 31.24). 
How could you test the following hypotheses? Hypothesis 
1: Crustose, foliose, and fruticose lichens each represent a 
monophyletic group. Hypothesis 2: Each lichen growth form 
represents convergent evolution by diverse fungal groups.
7. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Fungi are 
important decomposers. In a short essay (100–150 words), 
describe how the unique metabolic property of fungi benefits 
the energy cycle of ecosystems.
8. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This wasp is the unfortunate victim of an entomopathogenic 
fungus (a parasitic fungus of insects). Write a paragraph 
describing what this image illustrates about the nutritional 
mode, body structure, and ecological role of the fungus.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–4 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
impact of Curvularia on the heat tolerance of this grass. They 
grew plants without (E-) and with (E+) Curvularia endophytes 
at different temperatures and measured plant mass and the 
number of new shoots the plants produced. Draw a bar graph 
for plant mass versus temperature and interpret it.
726 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
5. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • INTERPRET THE DATA The grass 
Dichanthelium lanuginosum lives in hot soils and houses fungi 
of the genus Curvularia as endophytes. Researchers tested the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C31_PRF.indd   726 3/14/20   3:34 AM

=== SIDE 728 ===

727
Figure 32.1 This chameleon can wield its long, sticky tongue with blinding speed to 
capture its prey. Other predatory animals use strength, concealed traps, or toxins to 
capture prey. Likewise, herbivorous animals can strip plants bare of leaves or seeds, 
while parasitic animals weaken their hosts by consuming their tissues or body fluids. 
Overall, we can think of animals as a kingdom of consumers.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 32
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Visualizing Animal Body 
Symmetry and Axes
• Tutorial: Animal Body Plans
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Calculating and 
Interpreting Correlation Coefficients
32.1 Animals are multicellular, 
heterotrophic eukaryotes with 
tissues that develop from 
embryonic layers  p. 728
32.2 The history of animals spans more 
than half a billion years  p. 729
32.3 Animals can be characterized by 
body plans  p. 733
32.4 Views of animal phylogeny 
continue to be shaped by new 
molecular and morphological 
data  p. 736
KEY CONCEPTS
An Introduction  
to Animal Diversity32
Study Tip
Draw a time line: Create a time line like 
the one shown here, and mark when 
the following occurred: first biochemical 
evidence of animals, Edicaran biota, 
Cambrian explosion, colonization of land by 
vertebrates, and dinosaur extinction. Briefly 
describe the significance of each event.
710 million
years ago (mya)
Present
First biochemical
evidence of animals:
Sediments containing
steroids from sponges
What key characteristics of animals make them such 
efficient consumers?
Animals are
heterotrophs:
They obtain energy
and  nutrients by
eating other
organisms.
Animals have tissues, 
collections of 
specialized cells that 
function as a unit. 
Tissues form from
layers of embryonic 
cells.
Their nerve and muscle
cells enable animals to
move as well as to 
detect and capture 
potential prey.
The tissues of animals
include those composed
of unique nerve
and muscle cells.
Anus
Animal embryo
(cross section)
Muscle cells
Mouth
Nerve cellAnimals process their food inside
their bodies. Many animals have
an efficient digestive system
that has a mouth at
one end and an
anus at the other.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   727 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 729 ===

728 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
most animals, cleavage leads to the formation of a multicellu-
lar embryonic stage called a blastula, which in many animals 
takes the form of a hollow ball (Figure 32.2). Following this 
stage is the process of gastrulation, during which the layers 
of embryonic tissues that will develop into adult body parts are 
produced (see also Figure 46.8). The resulting developmental 
stage is called a gastrula.
Although some animals, including humans, develop 
directly into adults, the life cycles of most animals include 
at least one larval stage. A larva is a sexually immature form 
of an animal that is morphologically distinct from the adult, 
usually eats different 
food, and may even 
have a different hab-
itat than the adult, 
as in the case of the 
aquatic larva of a 
mosquito or drag-
onfly. Animal larvae 
eventually undergo 
metamorphosis, 
a developmental 
transformation that  
Animals are multicellular, 
heterotrophic eukaryotes 
with tissues that develop from 
embryonic layers
Listing features shared by all animals is challenging, as there 
are exceptions to nearly every criterion we might select. 
When taken together, however, several characteristics of  
animals sufficiently describe the group for our discussion.
Nutritional Mode
Animals differ from both plants and fungi in their mode of 
nutrition. Plants are autotrophic eukaryotes capable of gen-
erating organic molecules through photosynthesis. Fungi are 
heterotrophs that grow on or near their food and that feed 
by absorption (often after they have released enzymes that 
digest the food outside their bodies). Unlike plants, animals 
cannot construct all of their own organic molecules, and so, 
in most cases, they ingest them—either by eating other living 
organisms or by eating nonliving organic material. But unlike 
fungi, most animals feed by ingesting their food and then 
using enzymes to digest it within their bodies.
Cell Structure and Specialization
Animals are eukaryotes, and like plants and most fungi, ani-
mals are multicellular. In contrast to plants and fungi, how-
ever, animals lack the structural support of cell walls. Instead, 
proteins external to the cell membrane provide structural 
support to animal cells and connect them to one another (see 
Figure 7.28). The most abundant of these proteins is collagen, 
which is not found in plants or fungi.
The cells of most animals are organized into tissues, groups 
of similar cells that act as a functional unit. For example, mus-
cle tissue and nervous tissue are responsible for moving the 
body and conducting nerve impulses, respectively. The ability 
to move and conduct nerve impulses underlies many of the 
adaptations that differentiate animals from plants and fungi 
(which lack muscle and nerve cells). For this reason, muscle 
and nerve cells are central to the animal lifestyle.
Reproduction and Development
Most animals reproduce sexually, and the diploid stage usually 
dominates the life cycle. In the haploid stage, sperm and egg 
cells are produced directly by meiotic division, unlike what 
occurs in plants and fungi (see Figure 13.6). In most animal 
species, a small, flagellated sperm fertilizes a larger, nonmo-
tile egg, forming a diploid zygote. The zygote then undergoes 
cleavage, a succession of mitotic cell divisions without cell 
growth between the divisions. During the development of 
Blastula
Gastrulation
Cross section
of gastrula
Eight-cell stage
Cross section
of blastula
Zygote
Cleavage
Cleavage
Blastocoel
Blastopore
Blastocoel
Endoderm
Archenteron
Ectoderm
In most animals,
cleavage produces
a multicellular
stage called a
blastula. The blas-
tula is typically a
hollow ball of cells
that surround a
cavity called
the blastocoel.
1
3
4
The pouch formed
by gastrulation, called the
archenteron, opens to the
outside via the blastopore.
5
The endoderm of the
archenteron develops
into the tissue
lining the animal’s
digestive tract.
6
2
Most animals also undergo 
gastrulation, a process in which 
one end of the embryo folds 
inward, expands, and eventually 
fills the blastocoel, producing 
layers of embryonic tissues: the 
ectoderm (outer layer) and the 
endoderm (inner layer).
An eight-cell 
embryo is formed 
by three rounds 
of cell division.
The zygote of
an animal
undergoes a
 series of mitotic
cell divisions
called cleavage.
. Figure 32.2 Early embryonic  
development in animals.
CONCEPT 32.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   728 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 730 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  729
crocodiles. Various studies suggest that this great diversity 
originated during the last billion years. For example, research-
ers have unearthed 710-million-year-old sediments contain-
ing chemical evidence of steroids that today are primarily 
produced by a particular group of sponges. Since sponges 
are animals, these “fossil steroids” suggest that animals had 
arisen by 710 million years ago.
DNA analyses generally agree with this fossil biochemical 
evidence; for example, one recent molecular clock study esti-
mated that sponges originated about 700 million years ago. 
These findings are also consistent with molecular analyses 
suggesting that the common ancestor of all extant animal 
species lived about 770 million years ago. What was this 
common ancestor like, and how did animals arise from their 
single-celled ancestors?
Steps in the Origin of Multicellular Animals
One way to gather information about the origin of animals 
is to identify protist groups that are closely related to ani-
mals. As shown in Figure 32.3, morphological and molecu-
lar evidence point to choanoflagellates as the closest living 
relatives of animals. Based on such evidence, researchers 
have hypothesized that the common ancestor of choano-
flagellates and living animals may have been a suspension 
feeder similar to present-day choanoflagellates.
Scientists exploring how animals may have arisen from 
their single-celled ancestors have noted that the origin of 
multicellularity requires the evolution of new ways for cells 
to adhere (attach) and signal (communicate) to each other. 
To learn more about such mechanisms, researchers compared 
turns the animal into a juvenile that resembles an adult but is 
not yet sexually mature.
Though adult animals vary widely in morphology, the 
genes that control animal development are similar across a 
broad range of taxa. All animals have developmental genes 
that regulate the expression of other genes, and many of 
these regulatory genes contain sets of DNA sequences called 
homeoboxes (see Concept 20.6). In particular, most animals 
share a unique homeobox-containing family of genes, known 
as Hox genes. Hox genes play important roles in the develop-
ment of animal embryos, controlling the expression of many 
other genes that influence morphology.
CONCEPT CHECK 32.1
1. Summarize the main stages of animal development. What 
family of control genes plays a major role?
2. WHAT IF? What animal characteristics would be needed by 
an imaginary plant that could chase, capture, and digest its 
prey—yet could also extract nutrients from soil and conduct 
photosynthesis?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 32.2
The history of animals spans 
more than half a billion years
To date, biologists have identified 1.3 million extant spe-
cies of animals, and estimates of the actual number run far 
higher. This vast diversity encompasses a spectacular range 
of morphological variation, from corals to cockroaches to 
Animals
     &0# seSuence data indicate tJat cJoanoﬂagellates
and aniOals are sister groups +n addition genes for
signaling and adJesion proteins preXiousl[ MnoYn onl[
froO aniOals JaXe Deen discoXered in cJoanoﬂagellates
3
     5iOilar collar cells JaXe Deen identiƂed in otJer aniOals including
cnidarians ﬂatYorOs and ecJinoderOstDut tJe[ JaXe neXer Deen
oDserXed in noncJoanoﬂagellate protists or in plants or fungi
2
OTHER
EUKARYOTES
%hoanoﬂagellates
5ponges
1ther aniOals
+ndividual
choanoﬂagellate
%ollar cell

choanocyte
     /orpJologicall[ 
cJoanoﬂagellate cells 
and tJe collar cells 
or 
choanocytes of 
sponges a Dasal group 
of aniOals are alOost 
indistinguisJaDle
1
. Figure 32.3 Three lines of evidence that 
choanoflagellates are closely related to animals.
? Are the data described in 3 consistent with 
predictions that could be made from the evidence in  
1 and 2? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   729 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 731 ===

730 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
soft-bodied multicellular eukaryotes, known collectively as 
the Ediacaran biota. The name comes from the Ediacara 
Hills of Australia, where fossils of these organisms were first 
discovered (Figure 32.5). Similar fossils have since been 
found on other continents. Among the oldest Ediacaran 
fossils that resemble animals, some have been classified as 
molluscs (snails and their relatives) or close relatives of the 
molluscs, while others are thought to be sponges or cnidar-
ians (sea anemones and their relatives). Still others have 
proved difficult to classify, as they do not seem to be closely 
related to any living animal or algal groups. In addition to 
these macroscopic fossils, Neoproterozoic rocks have also 
yielded what may be microscopic fossils of early animal 
embryos. Although these microfossils appear to exhibit 
the basic structural organization of present-day animal 
the genome of the unicellular choanoflagellate Monosiga 
brevicollis with those of representative animals. This analy-
sis uncovered 78 protein domains in M. brevicollis that were 
otherwise only known to occur in animals. (A domain is a key 
structural or functional region of a protein.) For example, 
M. brevicollis has genes that encode domains of certain proteins 
(known as cadherins) that play key roles in how animal  
cells attach to one another, as well as genes that encode 
protein domains that animals (and only animals) use in  
cell-signaling pathways.
Let’s take a closer look at the cadherin attachment proteins 
we just mentioned. DNA sequence analyses show that animal 
cadherin proteins are composed primarily of domains that 
are also found in a cadherin-like protein of choanoflagel-
lates (Figure 32.4). However, animal cadherin proteins also 
contain a highly conserved region not found in the choano-
flagellate protein (the “CCD” domain labeled in Figure 32.4). 
These data suggest that the cadherin attachment protein 
originated by the rearrangement of protein domains found in 
choanoflagellates plus the incorporation of a novel domain, 
the conserved CCD region. Overall, comparisons of choano-
flagellate and animal genomes suggest that key steps in the 
transition to multicellularity in animals involved new ways of 
using proteins or parts of proteins that were encoded by genes 
found in choanoflagellates.
Next, we’ll survey the fossil evidence for how animals 
evolved from their distant common ancestor over four geo-
logic eras (see Table 25.1 to review the geologic time scale).
(b)Kimberella, a mollusc 
(or close relative)
(a)Dickinsonia costata 
(animal phylum 
unknown)
2.5 cm
0.5 cm
m Figure 32.5 Ediacaran fossil 
animals. Fossils dating to 560 
million years ago document the 
earliest known macroscopic animals, 
including these two species.
Choanoflagellate
Hydra
“CCD” domain (only
found in animals)
Fruit fly
Mouse
b Figure 32.4 Cadherin proteins in choanoflagellates  
and animals. The ancestral cadherin-like protein of choano-
flagellates has seven kinds of domains (regions), each represented 
here by a particular symbol. With the exception of the “CCD” 
domain, which is found only in animals, the domains of animal 
cadherin proteins are present in the choanoflagellate cadherin-like 
protein. The cadherin protein domains shown here were identified 
from whole-genome sequence data; evolutionary relationships are 
based on morphological and DNA sequence data.
Neoproterozoic Era (1 Billion–541 Million 
Years Ago)
Although data from fossil steroids and molecular clocks 
indicate an earlier origin, the first generally accepted macro-
scopic fossils of animals date from about 560 million years 
ago. These fossils are members of an early group of mostly 
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   730 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 732 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  731
complete digestive tract, an efficient digestive system that has 
a mouth at one end and an anus at the other. As we’ll discuss 
later in the chapter, bilaterians include molluscs, arthropods, 
chordates, and most other living animal phyla.
As the diversity of animal phyla increased during the 
Cambrian, the diversity of Ediacaran life-forms declined. What 
caused these trends? Fossil evidence suggests that during the 
early Cambrian period, as predators acquired novel adapta-
tions for catching prey, such as claws, prey species acquired 
new defenses, such as protective shells. As new predator-prey 
relationships emerged, natural selection may have led to the 
decline of the soft-bodied Ediacaran species and the rise of 
various bilaterian phyla. Another hypothesis focuses on an 
increase in atmospheric oxygen that preceded the Cambrian 
explosion. More plentiful oxygen would have enabled animals 
with higher metabolic rates and larger body sizes to thrive, 
while potentially harming other species. A third hypothesis 
proposes that genetic changes affecting development, such as 
the origin of Hox genes and the addition of new microRNAs 
(small RNAs involved in gene regulation), facilitated the evolu-
tion of new body forms. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can 
investigate whether there is a correlation between microRNAs 
(miRNAs; see Figure 18.15) and body complexity in various 
animal phyla. These various hypotheses are not mutually 
exclusive; predator-prey relationships, atmospheric changes, 
and changes in development may each have played a role.
The Cambrian period was followed by the Ordovician, 
Silurian, and Devonian periods, when animal diversity con-
tinued to increase, although punctuated by episodes of mass 
extinction (see Figure 25.18). Vertebrates (fishes) emerged 
0.1 mm
Bore hole
. Figure 32.6 Early evidence of predation. This 550-million-
year-old fossil of the animal Cloudina shows evidence of having 
been attacked by a predator that bored  
through its shell.
embryos, debate continues about whether these fossils are 
indeed of animals.
The fossil record from the Ediacaran period (635–541 mil-
lion years ago) also provides early evidence of predation. 
Consider Cloudina, a small animal whose body was protected 
by a shell resembling a series of nested cones (Figure 32.6). 
Some Cloudina fossils show signs of attack: round “bore holes” 
that resemble those formed today by predators that drill 
through the shells of their prey to gain access to the soft-bodied 
organisms lying within. Like Cloudina, some other small 
Ediacaran animals had shells or other defensive structures that 
may have been selected for by predators. Overall, the fossil 
evidence indicates that the Ediacaran was a time of increasing 
animal diversity—a trend that continued in the Paleozoic.
Paleozoic Era (541–252 Million Years Ago)
Another wave of animal diversification occurred 535–525 
million years ago, early in the Cambrian period of the Paleozoic 
era—a phenomenon referred to as the Cambrian explo-
sion (see Concept 25.3). In strata formed before the Cambrian 
explosion, only a few animal phyla have been observed. But in 
strata that are 535–525 million years old, paleontologists have 
found the oldest fossils of about half of all extant animal phyla, 
including the first arthropods, chordates, and echinoderms. 
Many of these fossils, which 
include the first large animals 
with hard, mineralized skeletons, 
look very different from most 
living animals (Figure 32.7). 
Even so, paleontologists have 
established that these Cambrian 
fossils are members of extant 
animal phyla, or at least are close 
relatives. In particular, most of 
the fossils from the Cambrian 
explosion are of bilaterians, an 
enormous clade whose members 
(unlike sponges and cnidarians) 
typically have a two-sided or 
bilaterally symmetric form and a 
m Figure 32.7 A Cambrian seascape. This artist’s reconstruction depicts a diverse array of organisms 
found in fossils from the Burgess Shale site in British Columbia, Canada. The animals include Pikaia (eel-like 
chordate at top left), Marella (small arthropod swimming at left), Anomalocaris (large animal with grasping 
limbs near a circular mouth), and Hallucigenia (animals with toothpick-like spikes on the seafloor and in inset).
1 cm
508-million-year-old 
fossil of Hallucigenia
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   731 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 733 ===

732 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Is Animal Complexity Correlated 
with miRNA Diversity? Animal 
phyla vary greatly in morphology, 
from simple sponges that lack tissues 
and symmetry to complex vertebrates. 
Members of different animal phyla 
have similar developmental genes, but 
the number of miRNAs varies consider-
ably. In this exercise, you will explore 
whether miRNA diversity is correlated 
to morphological complexity.
How the Study Was Done In the 
analysis, miRNA diversity is represented 
by the average number of miRNAs in a 
phylum (x), while morphological com-
plexity is represented by the average 
number of cell types (y). Researchers ex-
amined the relationship between these 
two variables by calculating the cor-
relation coefficient (r). The correlation 
coefficient indicates the extent and di-
rection of a linear relationship between 
two variables (x and y) and ranges in value between -1 and 1. When 
r 6 0, x and y are negatively correlated, meaning that in a plot of the 
data points, values of y become smaller as values of x become larger. 
When r 7 0, x and y are positively correlated (y becomes larger as x 
becomes larger). When r = 0, the variables are not correlated.
The formula for the correlation coefficient r is the following:
r=a(xi-x)(yi-y)
(n-1)(sxsy)
In this formula, n is the number of observations, xi is the value of 
the ith observation of variable x, and yi is the value of the ith ob-
servation of variable y. x and y are the means of variables x and y, 
and sx and sy are the standard deviations of variables x and y. The 
g symbol indicates that the n values of the product (xi-x) (yi-y) 
are to be added together.
Calculating and Interpreting Correlation Coefficients
Scientific Skills Exercise
Data from the Study
Animal Phylumi
No. of 
miRNAs (xi)(xi-x)(xi-x)2
No. of Cell 
Types (yi)(yi-y)(yi-y)2(xi-x)(yi-y)
Porifera 1 5.8 25
Platyhelminthes 2 35 30
Cnidaria 3 2.5 34
Nematoda 4 26 38
Echinodermata 5 38.6 45
Cephalochordata 6 33 68
Arthropoda 7 59.1 73
Urochordata 8 25 77
Mollusca 9 50.8 83
Annelida 10 58 94
Vertebrata 11 147.5 172.5
x=
sx=
a= y=
sy=
a= a=
Data from B. Deline et al., Evolution of metazoan morphological disparity, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
USA 115:E8909–E8918 (2018).
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. First, practice reading the data table. For the eighth observation 
(i = 8), what are xi and yi? For which phylum are these data?
2. Next, we’ll calculate the mean and standard deviation for each 
variable (to review these topics, see the Scientific Skills Review 
in Appendix D). (a) The mean (x) is the sum of the data values 
divided by n, the number of observations: x=axi
n
 Calculate the 
mean number of miRNAs (x) and the mean number of cell types 
(y) and enter them in the data table (to calculate y, replace each 
x in the formula with a y). (b) Next, calculate (xi-x) and (yi-y) 
for each observation, recording your results in the appropriate 
column. Square each of those results to complete the (xi-x)2 and 
(yi-y)2 columns; sum the results for those columns. (c) Next, we’ll 
calculate the standard deviation, s, which describes the variation 
found in a data set. Calculate sx, the standard deviation of the 
miRNA data, using the following formula, where n = the number 
of observations. [Use the sum of (xi-x)2 you found in part (b).]
sx=A
a(xi-x)2
n-1
Repeat to find sy by substituting y for x in this equation.
3. Next, we’ll calculate the correlation coefficient r for the variables 
x and y. (a) First, use the results from question 2(b) to complete 
the (xi-x)(yi-y) column; sum the results in that column. 
(b) Now find the product of sxsy using your results from 2(c) 
above. Plug these values into the formula for r.
4. Do these data indicate that miRNA diversity and animal com-
plexity are negatively correlated, positively correlated, or 
uncorrelated? Explain.
5. What does your analysis suggest about the role of miRNA 
diversity in the evolution of animal complexity?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
as the top predators of the marine food web. By 450 million 
years ago, groups that diversified during the Cambrian period 
began to make an impact on land. Arthropods were the first 
animals to adapt to terrestrial habitats, as indicated by frag-
ments of arthropod remains and by well-preserved fossils 
from several continents of millipedes, centipedes, and spi-
ders. Another clue is seen in fossilized fern galls—enlarged 
cavities that fern plants form in response to stimulation by 
resident insects, which then use the galls for protection. 
Fossils indicate that fern galls date back at least 302 million 
years, suggesting that insects and plants were influencing 
each other’s evolution by that time.
Vertebrates colonized land around 365 million years ago 
and diversified into numerous terrestrial groups. Two of 
these survive today: the amphibians (such as frogs and sala-
manders) and the amniotes (reptiles, including birds, and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   732 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 734 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  733
mammals). We will explore these groups, known collectively 
as the tetrapods, in more detail in Chapter 34.
Mesozoic Era (252–66 Million Years Ago)
The animal phyla that had evolved during the Paleozoic 
began to spread into new habitats. In the oceans, the first 
coral reefs formed, providing other marine animals with new 
places to live. Some reptiles returned to the water, leaving 
plesiosaurs (see Figure 34.25) and other large aquatic preda-
tors as their descendants. On land, descent with modification 
in some tetrapods led to the origin of wings and other flight 
equipment in pterosaurs and birds. Large and small dinosaurs 
emerged, as both predators and herbivores. At the same time, 
the first mammals—tiny nocturnal insect-eaters—appeared 
on the scene. In addition, as you read in Concept 30.3, flow-
ering plants (angiosperms) and insects both underwent dra-
matic diversifications during the late Mesozoic.
Cenozoic Era (66 Million Years Ago  
to the Present)
Mass extinctions of both terrestrial and marine animals ush-
ered in a new era, the Cenozoic. Among the groups of species 
that disappeared were the large, nonflying dinosaurs and the 
marine reptiles. The fossil record of the early Cenozoic docu-
ments the rise of large mammalian herbivores and preda-
tors as mammals began to exploit the vacated ecological 
niches. The global climate gradually cooled throughout the 
Cenozoic, triggering significant shifts in many animal lin-
eages. Among primates, for example, some species in Africa 
adapted to the open woodlands and savannas that replaced 
many of the former dense forests. The ancestors of our own 
species were among those grassland apes.
CONCEPT CHECK 32.2
1. Put the following milestones in animal evolution in order 
from oldest to most recent: (a) origin of mammals, (b) earli-
est evidence of terrestrial arthropods, (c) Ediacaran fauna, 
(d) extinction of large, nonflying dinosaurs.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Explain what is represented by the 
red-colored portion of the branch leading to animals. 
(See Figure 22.5, “Visualizing Phylogenetic Relationships,”  
to review phylogenetic tree diagrams.)
Fungi
Common ancestor
of fungi and
animals (1 bya)
Most recent common
ancestor of animals (770 mya)
Sponges
All other animals
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Evaluate whether the origin of cell-
to-cell attachment proteins in animals illustrates descent with 
modification. (See Concept 21.2.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 32.3
Animals can be characterized by 
body plans
Animal species vary tremendously in morphology, but their 
great diversity in form can be described by a relatively small 
number of major “body plans.” A body plan is a particular 
set of morphological and developmental traits that are inte-
grated into a functional whole—the living animal. The term 
plan here does not imply that animal forms are the result of 
conscious planning or invention. But body plans do provide 
a succinct way to compare and contrast key animal features. 
They also are of interest in the study of evo-devo, the interface 
between evolution and development.
Like all features of organisms, animal body plans have 
evolved over time. In some cases, including key stages in gastru-
lation, novel body plans emerged early in the history of animal 
life and have not changed since. As we’ll discuss, however, other 
aspects of animal body plans have changed multiple times over 
the course of evolution. As we explore the major features of ani-
mal body plans, bear in mind that similar body forms may have 
evolved independently in different lineages. In addition, body 
features can be lost over the course of evolution, causing some 
closely related species to look very different from one another.
Symmetry
A basic feature of animal bodies is their type of symmetry—
radial or bilateral—or absence of symmetry. (Many sponges, 
for example, lack symmetry altogether.) Use Figure 32.8 to 
help you visualize radial and bilateral symmetry and how 
axes of orientation are used to describe the position of differ-
ent parts of an animal’s body.
The symmetry of an animal generally fits its lifestyle. Many 
radial animals are sessile (living attached to a substrate) or plank-
tonic (drifting or weakly swimming, such as jellies, commonly 
called jellyfishes). Their symmetry equips them to meet the envi-
ronment equally well from all sides. In contrast, bilateral animals 
typically move actively from place to place. Nearly all animals 
with a bilaterally symmetric body plan (such as arthropods and 
mammals) have sensory equipment concentrated at the head end 
of their body, including a central nervous system (“brain”). This 
central nervous system enables them to coordinate the complex 
movements involved in crawling, burrowing, flying, or swimming. 
Fossil evidence indicates that these two fundamentally different 
kinds of symmetry have existed for at least 550 million years.
Tissues
Animal body plans also vary with regard to tissue organization. 
Recall that tissues are collections of specialized cells that act 
as a functional unit. Sponges and a few other groups lack tis-
sues. In all other animals, the embryo becomes layered during 
gastrulation (see Figure 46.8, “Visualizing Gastrulation,” 
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   733 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 735 ===

734 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
other organs between the digestive tract and the outer cover-
ing of the animal. Triploblasts include a broad range of ani-
mals, from flatworms to arthropods to vertebrates. (Although 
some diploblasts actually do have a third germ layer, it is not 
nearly as well developed as the mesoderm of animals consid-
ered to be triploblastic.)
Body Cavities
Nearly all animals have a body cavity, a fluid- or air-filled 
space located between the digestive tract (endoderm) and the 
outer body wall (ectoderm). Body cavities have diverse func-
tions, such as to provide structural support and to facilitate 
the internal transport of nutrients, gases, and wastes.
Many triploblastic animals have a coelom (from the Greek 
koilos, hollow), a body cavity that forms from tissue derived 
from mesoderm. The inner and outer layers of mesoderm that 
surround the cavity connect and form structures that suspend 
which will help you understand this three-dimensional 
folding process). As development progresses, these layers, 
called germ layers, form the various tissues and organs of the 
body. Ectoderm, the germ layer covering the surface of the 
embryo, gives rise to the outer covering of the animal and, 
in some phyla, to the central nervous system. Endoderm, 
the innermost germ layer, lines the pouch that forms during 
gastrulation (the archenteron) and gives rise to the lining of 
the digestive tract (or cavity) and to the lining of organs such 
as the liver and lungs of vertebrates.
Cnidarians and a few other animal groups that have only 
these two germ layers are said to be diploblastic. All bilater-
ally symmetrical animals have a third germ layer, called the 
mesoderm, which fills much of the space between the ecto-
derm and endoderm. Thus, animals with bilateral symmetry 
are also said to be triploblastic (having three germ layers). 
In triploblasts, the mesoderm forms the muscles and most 
A basic feature of animal bodies is their type of symmetry. We’ll focus on two common
types of symmetry: radial symmetry and bilateral symmetry.
1.Does a radial animal have a front 
side and a back side? A left side 
and a right side? Explain.
2.Draw the two axes of orientation on
this owl and label its head end, tail end, 
and dorsal, ventral, right, and left sides.
Radial Symmetry
The body parts of a radially
symmetrical animal are arranged
around a single main axis that
passes through the center of the
animal. Any imaginary slice
through the central axis, as
shown here in blue, divides the
animal into mirror images.
Bilateral Symmetry and Body Axes
The body parts of a
bilaterally symmetrical
animal are arranged
around two axes of
orientation, the  
head-tail axis and the
dorsal-ventral axis. Only
one imaginary slice,
again shown in blue,
divides the animal into
mirror-image halves,
referred to as a right
side and a left side.
The symmetrical central 
body cavity of this hydra 
has a single opening 
(the “mouth/anus”) 
surrounded by a circular 
rim of tentacles. Prey 
captured by the  
tentacles are pushed into 
the body cavity and 
digested.
Lobsters and other bilateral animals have a
head end and a tail end, a dorsal (top) side and 
a ventral (bottom) side, as well as a right side 
and a left side. In nearly all bilateral animals, eyes 
and other sensory organs are concentrated in the 
head end of the body.
Many sponges have
an irregular shape,
lacking symmetry
altogether. But like
this barrel sponge,
some sponges
exhibit radial
symmetry, with their
cells arranged
in a regular pattern
around a central
axis.
An upright posture
evolved in some
groups of bilateral
animals, including
humans and birds,
such as the owl
shown here.
Right
Dorsal
Tail end
Left
Ventral
Head end
Central axis
  Instructors: Additional questions related to this Visualizing 
Figure can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
/uni25BC Figure 32.8  VISUALIZING ANIMAL BODY SYMMETRY AND AXES
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   734 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 736 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  735
Hemolymph is analogous to your blood and is circulated 
through the body cavity in an open system by the heart.
Many animals have a hemocoel and a coelom. Molluscs, 
for instance, have a hemocoel as the primary body cavity, 
but they also have a reduced coelom that surrounds the heart 
and reproductive structures (see Figure 33.16). Other animals, 
such as rotifers and nematodes (see Figures 33.12 and 33.26), 
have only a hemocoel. Animals with only a hemocoel once 
were called pseudocoelomates (from the Greek pseudo, false) 
and the cavity, a pseudocoelom. Hemocoels and coeloms 
have been independently gained or lost multiple times in the 
course of animal evolution; hence, their presence or absence 
is not a good indicator of phylogenetic relationships.
Finally, some triploblastic animals lack a body cavity 
altogether (Figure 32.9c). These compact animals tend to 
have thin, flat bodies. Such animals don’t require an internal 
transport system: With bodies that are only a few cells thick, 
the exchange of nutrients, gases, and wastes can occur across 
the entire body surface. These animals are sometimes called 
 acoelomates (from the Greek a-, without).
Protostome and Deuterostome Development
Many animals can be described as having one of two 
developmental modes: protostome development or 
deuterostome development. These modes can generally 
be distinguished by differences in cleavage, coelom forma-
tion, and fate of the blastopore.
Cleavage
Many animals with protostome development undergo spiral 
cleavage, in which the planes of cell division are diagonal to 
the vertical axis of the embryo; as seen in the eight-cell stage of 
the embryo, smaller cells are centered over the grooves between 
larger, underlying cells (Figure 32.10a, left). Furthermore, the 
so-called determinate cleavage of some animals with pro-
tostome development rigidly casts (“determines”) the devel-
opmental fate of each embryonic cell very early. A cell isolated 
from a snail at the four-cell stage, for example, cannot develop 
into a whole animal. Instead, after repeated divisions, such a 
cell will form an inviable embryo that lacks many parts.
In contrast to the spiral cleavage pattern, deutero-
stome development is predominantly characterized by 
radial cleavage. The cleavage planes are either parallel or 
perpendicular to the vertical axis of the embryo; as seen at 
the eight-cell stage, the tiers of cells are aligned, one directly 
above the other (see Figure 32.10a, right). Most animals 
with deuterostome development also have indeterminate 
cleavage, meaning that each cell produced by early cleav-
age divisions retains the capacity to develop into a complete 
embryo. For example, if the cells of a sea urchin embryo are 
separated at the four-cell stage, each can form a complete 
larva. Similarly, it is the indeterminate cleavage of the human 
zygote that makes identical twins possible.
the internal organs (Figure 32.9a). A coelom’s fluid cushions 
the suspended organs, helping to prevent internal injury. 
In soft-bodied animals, such as earthworms, the fluid in the 
coelom acts like a skeleton against which muscles can work. 
A coelom also enables the internal organs to grow and move 
independently of the outer body wall. If it were not for your 
coelom, for example, every beat of your heart or ripple of 
your intestine would warp your body’s surface. Animals pos-
sessing coeloms are sometimes called coelomates.
Other triploblastic animals have a hemocoel, a body 
cavity that forms between the mesoderm and endoderm 
(Figure 32.9b). A hemocoel contains hemolymph, a fluid that 
functions in the internal transport of nutrients and waste. 
(a) Coelom
(b) Hemocoel
(c) Compact (no body cavity)
Tissue layer
lining coelom
and suspending
internal organs
(from mesoderm)
Coelom
Body covering
(from ectoderm) Tissue-
filled region
(from 
mesoderm)
Wall of digestive cavity
(from endoderm)
Body covering
(from ectoderm)
Body covering
(from ectoderm)
Muscle layer
(from 
mesoderm)
Digestive tract
(from endoderm)
Digestive tract
(from endoderm)
Hemocoel
Some animals, such as planarians, lack a body cavity between 
the digestive cavity and outer body wall.
Roundworms and many other animals have a hemocoel, a body 
cavity lined by tissue derived from mesoderm and by tissue derived 
from endoderm.
Many animals, including earthworms, have a coelom, a body cavity 
completely lined by tissue derived from mesoderm.
Ectoderm Mesoderm Endoderm
Key
. Figure 32.9 Body cavities of triploblastic animals. The 
organ systems develop from the three embryonic germ layers.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   735 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 737 ===

736 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
CONCEPT CHECK 32.3
1. Name an organ or body part formed from each of the germ 
layers in a triploblastic animal.
2. Describe how animals that lack a body cavity exchange 
materials without an internal transport system.
3. WHAT IF? Evaluate this claim: Ignoring the details of their 
specific anatomy, worms, humans, and most other triplo-
blasts have a shape analogous to that of a doughnut.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Views of animal phylogeny 
continue to be shaped by new 
molecular and morphological data
As animals with diverse body plans radiated during the early 
Cambrian, some lineages arose, thrived for a period of time, 
CONCEPT 32.4
Protostome development
(examples: molluscs,
annelids)
Deuterostome development
(examples: echinoderms,
chordates)
Eight-cell stage
Spiral and determinate Radial and indeterminate
Coelom
Coelom
Archenteron
Digestive tube
Anus Mouth
Mouth Anus
BlastoporeMesoderm
Solid masses of mesoderm
split and form coelom.
Folds of archenteron
form coelom.
Mouth develops from blastopore. Anus develops from blastopore.
(a)Cleavage. In general, 
protostome development 
begins with spiral, determinate 
cleavage. Deuterostome 
development is characterized 
by radial, indeterminate 
cleavage.
(b) Coelom formation. Coelom 
formation begins in the 
gastrula stage. In protostome 
development, the coelom 
forms from splits in the 
mesoderm. In deuterostome 
development, the coelom 
forms from mesodermal 
outpocketings of the 
archenteron.
(c)Fate of the blastopore. In 
protostome development, 
the mouth forms from the 
blastopore. In deuterostome 
development, the mouth 
forms from a secondary 
opening.
Eight-cell stage
MesodermBlastopore
Ectoderm Mesoderm EndodermEndodermKey
. Figure 32.10 Protostome and deuterostome development. The patterns 
shown here are useful general  
distinctions, though there are many  
variations and exceptions to them.
Coelom Formation
During gastrulation, an 
embryo’s developing digestive 
tube initially forms as a blind 
pouch, the archenteron, 
which becomes the gut 
(Figure 32.10b). As the arch-
enteron forms in protostome 
development, initially solid 
masses of mesoderm split and 
form the coelom. In contrast, 
in deuterostome development, 
the mesoderm buds from the 
wall of the archenteron, and 
its cavity becomes the coelom.
Fate of the Blastopore
Protostome and deuterostome 
development often differ in 
the fate of the blastopore, 
the indentation that during 
gastrulation leads to the for-
mation of the archenteron 
(Figure 32.10c). After the 
archenteron develops, in most 
animals a second opening 
forms at the opposite end of 
the gastrula. In many species, 
the blastopore and this second opening become the two open-
ings of the digestive tube: the mouth and the anus. In proto-
stome development, the mouth generally develops from the 
first opening, the blastopore, and it is for this characteristic 
that the term protostome derives (from the Greek protos, first, 
and stoma, mouth). In deuterostome development (from the 
Greek deuteros, second), the mouth is derived from the second-
ary opening, and the blastopore usually forms the anus.
and then became extinct, leaving no descendants. However, 
by 500 million years ago, most animal phyla with members 
alive today were established. Next, we’ll examine relation-
ships among these taxa along with some remaining questions 
that are currently being addressed using genomic data.
The Diversification of Animals
Zoologists currently recognize about three dozen phyla 
of extant animals, 15 of which are shown in Figure 32.11. 
Researchers infer evolutionary relationships among 
these phyla by analyzing whole genomes, as well as 
morphological traits, ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes, Hox 
genes, protein-coding nuclear genes, and mitochondrial 
genes. Notice how the following points are reflected in 
Figure 32.11.
1. All animals share a common ancestor . Current 
evidence indicates that animals are monophyletic, form-
ing a clade called Metazoa. All extant and extinct animal 
lineages have descended from a common ancestor.
2. Sponges are the sister group to all other animals. 
Sponges (phylum Porifera) are basal animals, having di-
verged from all other animals early in the history of the 
group. Recent morphological and phylogenomic analyses  
indicate that sponges are monophyletic, as shown here.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   736 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 738 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  737
As depicted in Figure 32.11, hemichordates (acorn worms), 
echinoderms (sea stars and relatives), and chordates are 
members of the bilaterian clade Deuterostomia; thus, the 
term deuterostome refers not only to a mode of animal devel-
opment, but also to the members of this clade. (The dual 
meaning of this term can be confusing since some organisms 
with a deuterostome developmental pattern are not members 
of clade Deuterostomia.) Hemichordates share some charac-
teristics with chordates, such as gill slits and a dorsal nerve 
cord; echinoderms lack these characteristics. These shared 
traits may have been present in the common ancestor of the 
deuterostome clade (and lost in the echinoderm lineage). As 
mentioned above, phylum Chordata, the only phylum with 
vertebrate members, also includes invertebrates.
Bilaterians also diversified in two major clades that are 
composed entirely of invertebrates: the lophotrochozoans and 
the ecdysozoans. The name Lophotrochozoa refers to two 
different features observed in some animals belonging to 
this clade (Figure 32.12). Some lophotrochozoans, such as 
ectoprocts, develop a unique structure called a lophophore 
(from the Greek lophos, crest, and pherein, to carry), a crown of 
Apical tuft
of cilia
Lophophore
Anus
Mouth
(a) 
(b) 
Lophophore feeding 
structures of an ectoproct
Structure of a trochophore larva
m Figure 32.12 Morphological 
characteristics of lophotrochozoans.
ANCESTRAL 
PROTIST
Porifera
Ctenophora
Cnidaria
Hemichordata
Echinodermata
Chordata
770 million
years ago
680 million
years ago
670 million
years ago
Platyhelminthes
Mollusca
Brachiopoda
Syndermata
Ectoprocta
Annelida
Nematoda 
Arthropoda
Metazoa
Eumetazoa
Bilateria
Deuterostomia
LophotrochozoaEcdysozoa
Acoela
c Figure 32.11 A phylogeny  
of living animals. This phylogeny 
shows a leading hypothesis about 
the relationships among selected animal 
phyla. The bilaterians are 
 divided into three main lineages: 
deuterostomes, lophotrochozoans, and 
ecdysozoans. The dates of origin identified 
here are based on the results of a recent 
molecular clock study.
VISUAL SKILLS Which phylum is the sister group  
of Bilateria in this tree?
3. Eumetazoa is a clade of animals with tissues. All 
animals except for sponges and a few others belong to 
a clade of eumetazoans (“true animals”). Members of 
this group have tissues, such as muscle tissue and ner-
vous tissue. Basal eumetazoans, which include the phyla 
Ctenophora (comb jellies) and Cnidaria, are diploblastic 
and generally have radial symmetry.
4. Most animal phyla belong to the clade Bilateria. 
Bilateral symmetry and the presence of three prominent 
germ layers are shared derived characters that help define 
the clade Bilateria. This clade contains the majority of 
animal phyla, and its members are known as bilaterians. 
The Cambrian explosion was primarily a rapid diversifi-
cation of bilaterians.
5. There are three major clades of bilaterian 
animals. Bilaterians have diversified into three main lin-
eages, Deuterostomia, Lophotrochozoa, and Ecdysozoa. 
With one exception, the phyla in these clades consist 
entirely of invertebrates, animals that lack a back-
bone; Chordata is the only phylum that also includes 
vertebrates, animals with a backbone.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   737 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 739 ===

evidence, molecular clock analyses, the morphological 
similarity of sponge collar cells to the cells of choanofla-
gellates (see Figure 32.3), and the fact that sponges are 
one of the few animal groups that lack tissues (as might 
be expected for basal animals). Ctenophores, on the 
other hand, have tissues, and their cells do not resemble 
the cells of choanoflagellates. At present, the idea that 
ctenophores are basal metazoans remains an intriguing 
but controversial hypothesis.
2. Are the Acoela basal bilaterians? A series of recent 
papers—including a 201 6 phylogenomic study—have 
indicated that flatworms in phylum Acoela are basal bila-
terians, as shown in Figure 32.1 1. A different conclusion 
was supported by one recent analysis, which placed 
members of the Acoela within Deuterostomia. Researchers 
are sequencing the genomes of additional species in the 
phylum and in closely related groups to provide a more 
definitive test of the hypothesis that the Acoela are basal 
bilaterians. If further evidence supports this hypothesis, 
bilaterians may have descended from a common ancestor 
that resembled this group of living flatworms—that is, an 
ancestor that had a simple nervous system, a saclike gut with 
a single opening (the “mouth”), and no excretory system.
ciliated tentacles that function in feeding (see Figure 32.12a). 
Individuals in other phyla, including molluscs and anne-
lids, go through a distinctive developmental stage called the 
trochophore larva (see Figure 32.12b)—hence the name 
lophotrochozoan. 
The clade name Ecdysozoa refers to a characteristic shared 
by nematodes, arthropods, and some of the other ecdysozoan 
phyla that are not included in our survey. These animals secrete 
external skeletons (exoskeletons); the stiff covering of a cricket 
and the flexible cuticle of a nematode are examples. As the ani-
mal grows, it molts, squirming out of its old exoskeleton and 
secreting a larger one. The process of shedding the old exoskel-
eton is called ecdysis. Though named for this characteristic, the 
clade was proposed mainly on the basis of molecular data that 
support the common ancestry of its members. Furthermore, 
some taxa excluded from this clade by their molecular data, such 
as certain species of leeches, do in fact molt.
Future Directions in Animal Systematics
While many scientists think that current evidence sup-
ports the phylogeny in Figure 32.11, aspects continue to be 
debated. Although it can be frustrating that the phylogenies 
in textbooks are not set-in-stone truths, the uncertainty 
inherent in these diagrams is a healthy reminder that science 
is an ongoing, dynamic process of inquiry. We’ll conclude 
with two questions that are the focus of ongoing research.
1. Are ctenophores basal metazoans? Many research-
ers have concluded that sponges are basal metazoans (see 
Figure 32.1 1). This conclusion was supported in a 2017 
phylogenomic analysis, but several other studies have 
placed the comb jellies (phylum Ctenophora) at the base 
of the animal tree. In addition to the most recent phy-
logenomic results, data consistent with placing sponges 
at the base of the animal tree include fossil steroid 
CONCEPT CHECK 32.4
1. Describe the evidence that cnidarians share a more recent 
common ancestor with other animals than with sponges.
2. WHAT IF? Suppose ctenophores are basal metazoans and 
sponges are the sister group of all remaining animals. Under 
this hypothesis, redraw Figure 32.11 and discuss whether 
animals with tissues would form a clade.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Based on the phylogeny in 
Figure 32.11 and the information in Figure 25.11, evaluate 
this statement: “The Cambrian explosion actually consists 
of three explosions, not one.”
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
32 Chapter Review   Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 32.1
Animals are multicellular, heterotrophic eukaryotes 
with tissues that develop from embryonic layers 
(pp. 728–729)
• Animals are heterotrophs that ingest their food.
• Animals are multicellular eukaryotes. Their cells are supported 
and connected to one another by collagen and other structural 
proteins located outside the cell membrane. Nervous tissue and 
muscle tissue are key animal features.
• In most animals, gastrulation follows the formation of the 
blastula and leads to the formation of embryonic tissue layers. 
Most animals have Hox genes that regulate the development of 
body form. Although Hox genes have been highly conserved over 
the course of evolution, they can produce a wide diversity of ani-
mal morphology.
? Describe key ways that animals differ from plants and fungi.
738 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   738 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 740 ===

 CHAPTER 32  An Introduction to Animal Diversity  739
Views of animal phylogeny continue to be shaped by 
new molecular and morphological data (pp. 736–738)
• This phylogenetic tree shows key steps in animal evolution:
Porifera
(basal animals)
Metazoa
Eumetazoa
Bilateria (most animals)
Ctenophora
Cnidaria
Acoela (basal
bilaterians)
Deuterostomia
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Tissues
Bilateral
symmetry
Three germ
layers
? Consider clades Bilateria, Lophotrochozoa, Metazoa, Chordata, 
Ecdysozoa, Eumetazoa, and Deuterostomia. List the clades to which 
humans belong in order from the most to the least inclusive clade.
CONCEPT 32.4
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
5. EVOLUTION CONNECTION A professor begins a lecture on 
animal phylogeny (as shown in Figure 32.1 1) by saying, “We are 
all worms.” In this context, what did she mean?
6. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS Animal life 
changed greatly during the Cambrian explosion, with  
some groups expanding in diversity and others declining. 
Write a short essay (100–150 words) interpreting these 
events as feedback regulation at the level of the biological 
community.
CONCEPT 32.2
The history of animals spans more than half a billion 
years (pp. 729–733)
• Fossil biochemical evidence and molecular clock analyses indi-
cate that animals arose over 700 million years ago.
• Genomic analyses suggest that key steps in the origin of animals 
involved new ways of using proteins that were encoded by genes 
found in choanoflagellates.
560 mya:
Ediacaran animals
Increased 
diversity of
mammals
535–525 mya:
Cambrian explosion
Origin and
diversification
of dinosaurs365 mya:
Early terrestrial
vertebrates
Era
Neoproterozoic Paleozoic Ceno-
zoic
0 66252541
Millions of years ago (mya)
1,000
Mesozoic
? What caused the Cambrian explosion? Describe current hypotheses.
CONCEPT 32.3
Animals can be characterized by body plans 
(pp. 733–736)
• Animals may lack symmetry or may have radial or bilateral 
symmetry. Bilaterally symmetrical animals have dorsal and 
ventral sides, as well as head and tail ends.
• Eumetazoan embryos may be diploblastic (two germ layers) 
or triploblastic (three germ layers). Triploblastic animals 
with a body cavity may have a coelom or a hemocoel 
(or both).
• Protostome and deuterostome development often differ 
in patterns of cleavage, coelom formation, and blastopore fate.
? Describe how body plans provide useful information yet should be 
interpreted cautiously as evidence of evolutionary relationships.
7. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This organism is an 
animal. What can 
you infer about its 
body structure and 
lifestyle (that might 
not be obvious from 
its appearance)? This 
animal has a protostome 
developmental pattern 
and a trochophore 
larva. Identify the major 
clades that this animal belongs to. Explain your selection, and 
describe when these clades originated and how they are related 
to one another.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–4 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C32_PRF.indd   739 3/14/20   3:36 AM

=== SIDE 741 ===

Figure 33.1 The blue dragon (Glaucus atlanticus) has thin, finger-like structures 
that help it to float (upside down) on the sea’s surface. It eats Portuguese men-of-
war and absorbs their stinging cells, which it then uses to deliver a deadly sting of 
its own. The blue dragon is just one of more than a million species of invertebrates 
(animals without a backbone), which account for over 95% of animal species.
How can we make sense of the great number and
morphological diversity of invertebrates?
Classifying invertebrate species into groups based on
evolutionary relationships—as in this simplified phylogeny of all 
animals—helps us to understand the great diversity of invertebrate life.
Cnidaria
(jellies and hydras)
Lophotrochozoa
(most diverse body
plans; includes flatworms,
molluscs, segmented worms)
Porifera
(sponges)
Ecdysozoa
(contains more species
than all other eukaryotic
groups combined)
Deuterostomia
(includes both invertebrate
and vertebrate species)
Common
ancestor of
all animals
Eumetazoa
Bilateria
Invertebrate 
species only
Animals with tissues: 
all animals except Porifera 
and a few other groups
Animals with two-sided
(bilateral) symmetry 
and three tissue layers:
most animals
KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 33
• Video: Echinoderm Tube Feet
• HHMI Animation: Coral Bleaching
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Ecdysozoans
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Understanding 
Experimental Design and Interpreting 
Data
Study Tip
Make a table: Invertebrates differ in 
how they obtain food, remove wastes, 
reproduce, and move throughout 
their habitat. As you read, summarize 
how members of the 11 phyla of 
invertebrates described in detail in this 
chapter solve these shared challenges 
of life.
33.1  Sponges are basal animals that lack 
tissues p. 744
33.2  Cnidarians are an ancient phylum  
of eumetazoans p. 745
33.3  Lophotrochozoans, a clade 
identified by molecular data, have 
the widest range of animal body 
forms p. 748
33.4  Ecdysozoans are the most 
species-rich animal group p. 759
33.5  Echinoderms and chordates are 
deuterostomes p. 767
Phylum Feeding
method
Waste
removal
Repro-
duction
Movement
Porifera Filter
feeders
Diffusion Herma-
phrodites
Sessile
740
33 Invertebrates
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   740 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 742 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 741
0.5 mm
Lophotrochozoa
Kingdom Animalia encompasses 1.3 million known species, and estimates of the total number of 
species range as high as 10–20 million. Of the 23 phyla surveyed here, 13  are discussed more fully in 
this chapter, Chapter 32, or Chapter 34; cross-references are given at the end of their descriptions.
Animals in this phylum are informally 
called sponges. Sponges are sessile animals 
that lack tissues. They live as ﬁlter feeders, 
trapping particles that pass through the 
internal channels of their body (see 
Concept 33.1).
The single known species in this 
phylum, Trichoplax adhaerens, 
doesn’t look like an animal. 
It consists of a simple bilayer of a 
few thousand cells and reproduces 
by dividing into two individuals
or by budding off many multicel-
lular individuals. Placozoans are 
thought to be basal animals, but it 
is not yet known how they are 
related to Porifera, Cnidaria, and 
other early-diverging phyla.    
Ctenophores (comb jellies) are 
diploblastic and radially sym-
metrical like cnidarians, suggest-
ing that both phyla diverged early 
from other animals. Comb jellies 
make up much of the ocean’s 
plankton. They have eight “combs” 
of cilia that propel the animals 
through the water.  When a small 
animal contacts the tentacles of 
some comb jellies, specialized cells 
burst open, covering the prey with 
sticky threads.
Cnidarians include corals, jellies, and 
hydras. These animals have a diploblas-
tic, radially symmetrical body plan that 
includes a gastrovascular cavity with a 
single opening that serves as both mouth 
and anus (see Concept 33.2).
Flatworms in this phylum have a simple 
nervous system and a saclike gut, and 
thus -
minthes. Recent molecular analyses, 
however, indicate that Acoela is a separate 
lineage that diverged before the three main 
This recently established phylum includes 
two groups formerly classiﬁed as separate 
phyla: the rotifers, microscopic animals 
with complex organ systems, and the 
acanthocephalans, highly modiﬁed 
parasites of vertebrates (see Concept 33.3).
Flatworms in this phylum (including 
tapeworms, planarians, and ﬂukes) have 
bilateral symmetry and a central nervous 
system that processes information from 
sensory structures. They have no body 
cavity or specialized organs for 
circulation (see Concept 33.3).
Porifera (5,500 species) Placozoa (1 species)
Ctenophora (100 species)
Cnidaria (10,000 species)
 
Acoela (400 species)                                       
A sponge
Hydra
Acoela
1.5 mm
A placozoan (LM)
A ctenophore, or comb jelly
A marine ﬂatworm A rotifer (LM)
100 om
Platyhelminthes (20,000 species) Syndermata (2,900 species)
Continued on next page
. Figure 33.2  Exploring Invertebrate Diversity
Invertebrates are animals that lack a backbone. They oc-
cupy almost every habitat on Earth, from the scalding water 
released by deep-sea hydrothermal vents to the frozen ground 
of Antarctica. Evolution in these varied environments has pro-
duced an immense diversity of forms, including species that are 
microscopic and species whose members can grow to 18 m  
long (1.5 times the length of a school bus). In this chapter, 
we’ll take a tour of the invertebrates, using the phylogenetic 
tree in Figure 33.1 as a guide. Figure 33.2 surveys 23 phyla as 
representatives of  invertebrate diversity.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   741 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 743 ===

Ecdysozoa
Gastrotrichs are tiny worms 
whose ventral surface is covered 
with cilia, leading them to be called 
hairy bellies. Most species live on 
the bottoms of lakes or oceans, 
where they feed on small organ-
isms and partially decayed organic 
matter. This individual has 
consumed algae, visible as the 
greenish material inside its gut. 
The only known cycliopho-
ran species, Symbion pandora, 
was discovered in 1995 on 
the mouthparts of a lobster. 
This tiny creature has a 
unique body plan and a 
bizarre life cycle: Males 
impregnate females that 
are still developing in their 
mothers’ bodies. The 
fertilized females escape, 
settle elsewhere on the lobster, 
and release their offspring.
Gastrotricha (800 species)
Loriciferans (from the Latin 
lorica, corset, and ferre, to 
bear) are tiny animals that 
inhabit sediments on the 
seafloor. A loriciferan can 
telescope its head, neck, and 
thorax in and out of the 
lorica, a pocket formed by 
six plates surrounding the 
abdomen. Though the 
natural history of loricifer-
ans is mostly a mystery, at 
least some species likely eat 
bacteria.
Priapulans are worms with 
a large, rounded proboscis 
at the anterior end. (They 
are named after Priapos, 
the Greek god of fertility, 
who was symbolized by a 
giant penis.) Ranging from 
0.5 mm to 20 cm in length, 
most species burrow through 
seafloor sediments. Fossil 
evidence suggests that 
priapulans were among the 
major predators during 
the Cambrian period.
Loricifera (10 species) Priapula (16 species)
Also called ribbon worms, 
nemerteans swim through 
water or burrow in sand, 
extending a unique proboscis 
to capture prey. Nemerteans 
have a reduced coelom, so 
their bodies are relatively 
solid. They also have an 
alimentary canal and a closed 
circulatory system in which 
the blood is contained in 
vessels and hence is distinct 
from fluid in the body cavity.
Nemertea 
(900 species)
Annelids, or segmented worms, 
are distinguished by their body 
segmentation. Earthworms are 
the most familiar annelids, but 
most annelids live in marine 
or freshwater habitats (see 
Concept 33.3).
Annelida 
(16,500 species)
Molluscs (including snails, 
clams, squids, and octo-
puses) have a soft body 
that in many species is pro-
tected by a hard shell (see 
Concept 33.3).
Mollusca 
(100,000 species)
Cycliophora (1 species)
A gastrotrich (differential
interference contrast LM)
A cycliophoran (colorized SEM)
100 om200 om
A ribbon worm
A marine
annelid
An octopus
A loriciferan (LM) A priapulan
50 om
Ectoprocts (also known as bryozoans) 
live as sessile colonies and are covered by 
a tough exoskeleton (see Concept 33.3).
Brachiopods, or lamp shells, may be 
easily mistaken for clams or other mol-
luscs. However, most brachiopods have 
a unique stalk that anchors them to 
their substrate, as well as a crown of cilia 
called a lophophore (see Concept 33.3).
Ectoprocts A brachiopod
Brachiopoda (335 species)Ectoprocta (4,500 species)
. Figure 33.2  (continued)
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   742 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 744 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 743
Deuterostomia
Onychophorans, also 
called velvet worms, 
originated during the 
Cambrian explosion 
(see Concept 25.3). Origi-
nally, they thrived in 
the ocean, but at some 
point they succeeded in 
colonizing land. Today 
they live only in humid 
forests. Onychophorans 
have fleshy antennae and 
several dozen pairs of 
saclike legs.
The vast majority of known animal 
species, including insects, crustaceans, 
and arachnids, are arthropods. All 
arthropods have a segmented exoskele-
ton and jointed appendages (see 
Concept 33.4).
More than 90% of all known chordate species 
have backbones (and thus are vertebrates). 
However, the phylum Chordata also includes 
two groups of invertebrates: lancelets and 
tunicates. See Chapter 34 for a full discussion 
of this phylum.
Echinoderms, such as sand 
dollars, sea stars, and sea 
urchins, are marine animals in 
the deuterostome clade that 
are bilaterally symmetrical 
as larvae but not as adults. 
They move and feed by using 
a network of internal canals 
to pump water to different 
parts of their body (see 
Concept 33.5).
Tardigrades (from the Latin 
tardus, slow, and gradus, step) 
are sometimes called water bears 
for their overall shape and 
lumbering, bearlike gait. Most 
tardigrades are less than 0.5 mm 
in length. Some live in oceans 
or fresh water, while others live 
on plants or animals. Harsh 
conditions may cause tardi-
grades to enter a state of 
dormancy; while dormant, they 
can survive for days at tempera-
tures as low as –200°C! A recent 
phylogenomic study found that over 15% of tardigrade genes 
entered their genome by horizontal gene transfer, the largest 
fraction known for any animal.
Onychophora (110 species)
Also called roundworms, nematodes 
are enormously abundant and 
diverse in the soil and in aquatic 
habitats; many species parasitize 
plants and animals. Their most dis-
tinctive feature is a tough cuticle that 
coats their body (see Concept 33.4).
Like echinoderms 
and chordates, 
hemichordates are 
members of the 
deuterostome clade 
(see Figure 32.1 1). 
Hemichordates 
share some traits
with chordates, 
such as gill slits and 
a dorsal nerve cord. 
The largest group 
of hemichordates 
is the enteropneusts, 
or acorn worms. Acorn worms are marine and generally live 
buried in mud or under rocks; they may grow to more than 
2 m in length.
Nematoda (25,000 species)
Hemichordata (85 species) Chordata (60,000 species)
Echinodermata (7,000 species)
Arthropoda 
(1,000,000 species)
Tardigrada (800 species)
An acorn worm
An onychophoran
A roundworm
Tardigrades (colorized SEM)
A spider 
(an arachnid)
100 om
A tunicate
A sea urchin
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   743 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 745 ===

744 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
unit as in muscle tissue and nervous tissue. However, the 
sponge body does contain several different cell types. For 
example, lining the interior of the spongocoel are flagel-
lated choanocytes, or collar cells (named for the finger-like 
projections that form a “collar” around the flagellum). These 
cells engulf bacteria and other food particles by phagocytosis. 
The similarity between choanocytes and the cells of choano-
flagellates supports molecular evidence indicating that ani-
mals and choanoflagellates are sister groups (see Figure 32.3).
The body of a sponge consists of two layers of cells sepa-
rated by a gelatinous region called the mesohyl. Because 
both cell layers are in contact with water, processes such as 
gas exchange and waste removal can occur by diffusion across 
the membranes of these cells. Other tasks are performed by 
cells called amoebocytes, named for their use of pseudopo-
dia. These cells move through the mesohyl and have many 
functions. For example, they take up food from the surround-
ing water and from choanocytes, digest it, and carry nutrients 
to other cells. Amoebocytes also manufacture tough skeletal 
fibers within the mesohyl. In some sponges, these fibers are 
sharp spicules made from calcium carbonate or silica. Other 
sponges produce more flexible fibers composed of a protein 
called spongin; you may have seen these pliant skeletons 
being sold as brown bath sponges. Finally, and perhaps most 
Sponges are basal animals that 
lack tissues
Animals in the phylum 
Porifera are known infor-
mally as sponges. Among 
the simplest of animals, 
sponges are sedentary and 
were mistaken for plants by the ancient Greeks. Most species 
are marine, and they range in size from a few millimeters to a 
few meters. Sponges are filter feeders: They filter out food 
particles suspended in the surrounding water as they draw 
it through their body, which in some species resembles a sac 
perforated with pores. Water is drawn through the pores into 
a central cavity, the spongocoel, and then flows out of the 
sponge through a larger opening called the osculum  
(Figure 33.3). More complex sponges have folded body walls, 
and many contain branched water canals and several oscula.
Sponges represent a lineage that diverged from other ani-
mals early in the history of the group; thus, they are said to 
be basal animals. Unlike nearly all other animals, sponges 
lack tissues, groups of similar cells that act as a functional 
Azure vase sponge (Callyspongia 
plicifera)
Flagellum
Osculum
Spicules
Water
flow
Collar
ChoanocyteFood particles
in mucus
Phagocytosis of
food particles Amoebocyte
     Choanocytes. The spongocoel is lined 
with flagellated cells called choanocytes.
By beating flagella, the choanocytes create
a current that draws water in through the 
pores and out through the osculum.
5
      Spongocoel. Water 
passing through pores 
enters a cavity called the 
spongocoel.
4
      Pores. Water enters the 
sponge through pores 
formed by doughnut-
shaped cells that span
the body wall.
3
      Epidermis. The outer 
layer consists of tightly 
packed epidermal cells.
2
      Mesohyl. The wall of
this sponge consists of
two layers of cells separated 
by a gelatinous matrix, the 
mesohyl (“middle matter”).
1
     The movement of a choanocyte‘s 
flagellum also draws water through its 
collar of finger-like projections. Food 
particles are trapped in the mucus 
that coats the projections, engulfed by 
phagocytosis, and either digested or 
transferred to amoebocytes.
6
     Amoebocytes. These cells can 
transport nutrients to other cells of 
the sponge body, produce materials 
for skeletal fibers (spicules), or 
become any type of sponge cell 
as needed.
7
. Figure 33.3  Anatomy of a sponge. In the main diagram, portions of the front and back wall are cut 
away to show the sponge’s internal structure.
CONCEPT 33.1 
Porifera
Cnidaria
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomia
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   744 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 746 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 745
polyp and the more motile medusa (Figure 33.4). Polyps are 
cylindrical forms that adhere to the substrate by the aboral 
end of their body (the end opposite the mouth) and extend 
their tentacles, waiting for prey. Examples of the polyp form 
include hydras and sea anemones. Although they are pri-
marily sedentary, many polyps can move slowly across their 
substrate using muscles at the aboral end of their body. When 
threatened by a predator, some sea anemones can detach 
from the substrate and “swim” by bending their body col-
umn back and forth, or thrashing their tentacles. A medusa 
(plural, medusae) resembles a flattened, mouth-down version 
of the polyp. It moves freely in the water by a combination 
of passive drifting and contractions of its bell-shaped body. 
Medusae include free-swimming jellies. The tentacles of a jelly 
dangle from the oral surface, which points downward. Some 
cnidarians exist only as polyps or only as medusae; others 
have both a polyp stage and a medusa stage in their life cycle.
Cnidarians are predators that often use tentacles arranged 
in a ring around their mouth to capture prey and push the 
food into their gastrovascular cavity, where digestion begins. 
Enzymes are secreted into the cavity, thus breaking down the 
prey into a nutrient-rich broth. Cells lining the cavity then 
absorb these nutrients and complete the digestive process; any 
undigested remains are expelled through the cnidarian’s mouth/
anus. The tentacles are armed with batteries of cnidocytes, 
cells unique to cnidarians that function in defense and prey 
capture. Cnidocytes contain cnidae (from the Greek cnide, 
nettle), capsule-like organelles that are capable of exploding 
outward and that give phylum Cnidaria its name (Figure 33.5). 
Specialized cnidae called nematocysts contain a stinging 
thread that can penetrate the body surface of the cnidarian’s 
prey. Other kinds of cnidae have long threads that stick to or 
entangle small prey that bump into the cnidarian’s tentacles.
Contractile tissues and nerves occur in their simplest 
forms in cnidarians. Cells of the epidermis (outer layer) and 
importantly, amoebocytes are totipotent (capable of becom-
ing other types of sponge cells). This gives the sponge body 
remarkable flexibility, enabling it to adjust its shape in 
response to changes in its physical environment (such as the 
direction of water currents).
Most sponges are hermaphrodites, meaning that each 
individual functions as both male and female in sexual repro-
duction by producing sperm and eggs. Almost all sponges 
exhibit sequential hermaphroditism: They function first as 
one sex and then as the other. Cross-fertilization can result 
when sperm released into the water current by an individual 
functioning as a male is drawn into a neighboring individual 
that is functioning as a female. The resulting zygotes develop 
into flagellated, swimming larvae that disperse from the 
parent sponge. After settling on a suitable substrate, a larva 
develops into a sessile adult.
Sponges produce a variety of antibiotics and other defensive 
compounds, which hold promise for fighting human diseases. 
For example, a compound called cribrostatin isolated from 
marine sponges can kill both cancer cells and penicillin-resistant 
strains of the bacterium Streptococcus. Other sponge-derived 
compounds are also being tested as possible anticancer agents.
Mouth/anus
Gastrovascular
cavity
T entacle
T entacle
Gastrodermis
Body
stalk
Mesoglea
Polyp (cross section) Medusa (cross section)
Mouth/anus
Epidermis
. Figure 33.4  Polyp and medusa forms of cnidarians. The 
body wall of a cnidarian has two layers of cells: an outer layer of 
epidermis (darker blue; derived from ectoderm) and an inner layer 
of gastrodermis (yellow; derived from endoderm). Digestion begins 
in the gastrovascular cavity and is completed inside food vacuoles 
in the gastrodermal cells. Sandwiched between the epidermis and 
gastrodermis is a gelatinous layer, the mesoglea.
CONCEPT CHECK 33.1
1. Describe how sponges feed.
2. WHAT IF? Some molecular evidence suggests that the sister 
group of animals is not the choanoflagellates, but rather a 
group of parasitic protists, Mesomycetozoa. Given that these 
parasites lack collar cells, can this hypothesis be correct? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 33.2 
Cnidarians are an ancient phylum 
of eumetazoans
All animals except sponges 
and a few other groups are 
eumetazoans (“true animals”), 
members of a clade of animals 
with tissues. One of the first 
lineages to have diverged from others in this clade is the phy-
lum Cnidaria, which originated about 680 million years ago 
according to DNA analyses. Cnidarians have diversified into 
a wide range of sessile and motile forms, including hydras, 
corals, and jellies (commonly called “jellyfish”). Yet most cni-
darians still exhibit the relatively simple, diploblastic, radial 
body plan that existed in early members of the group some 
560 million years ago.
The basic body plan of a cnidarian is a sac with a central 
digestive compartment, the gastrovascular cavity. A single 
opening to this cavity functions as both mouth and anus. 
There are two variations on this body plan: the largely sessile 
Porifera
Cnidaria
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomia
EumetazoaEumetazoa
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   745 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 747 ===

746 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Unlike hydrozoans, most scyphozoans and cubozoans 
spend the majority of their life cycles in the medusa stage. 
Coastal scyphozoans, for example, often have a brief polyp 
stage during their life cycle, whereas those that live in the 
open ocean generally lack the polyp stage altogether. As their 
name (which means “cube animals”) suggests, cubozoans 
have a box-shaped medusa stage. Most cubozoans live in 
tropical oceans and are equipped with highly toxic cnido-
cytes. For example, the sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri), a cubo-
zoan that lives off the coast of northern Australia, is one of 
the deadliest organisms known: Its sting causes intense pain 
and can lead to respiratory failure, cardiac arrest, and death 
within minutes.
gastrodermis (inner layer) have bundles of microfilaments 
arranged into contractile fibers. The gastrovascular cavity 
acts as a hydrostatic skeleton (see Concept 50.6) against 
which the contractile cells can work. When a cnidarian 
closes its mouth, the volume of the cavity is fixed, and con-
traction of selected cells causes the animal to change shape. 
Cnidarians have no brain. Instead, movements are coordi-
nated by a noncentralized nerve net that is associated with 
sensory structures distributed around the body. Thus, even 
though it lacks a brain, the animal can detect and respond to 
stimuli from all directions.
Fossil and molecular evidence suggests that early in its 
evolutionary history, the phylum Cnidaria diverged into two 
major clades, Medusozoa and Anthozoa (Figure 33.6).
Medusozoans
All cnidarians that produce a medusa are members of clade 
Medusozoa, a group that includes the scyphozoans (jellies) 
and cubozoans (box jellies) shown in Figure 33.6a, along  
with the hydrozoans. Most hydrozoans alternate between the 
polyp and medusa forms, as seen in the life cycle of Obelia  
(Figure 33.7). The polyp stage, a colony of interconnected 
polyps in the case of Obelia, is more conspicuous than the 
medusa. Hydras, among the few cnidarians found in fresh 
water, are also unusual hydrozoans in that they exist only in 
polyp form.
Tentacle
Nematocyst
“Trigger”
Thread
(coiled)
Cnidocyte
Thread
discharges
Body
surface
of prey
Thread
. Figure 33.5  A cnidocyte of a hydra. This type of cnidocyte 
contains a stinging capsule, the nematocyst, which contains a 
coiled thread. When a “trigger” is stimulated by touch or by certain 
chemicals, the thread shoots out, puncturing and injecting poison 
into prey.
  Mastering Biology  
Video: Jelly Swimming • Video: Hydra Eating Daphnia
Many scyphozoans (jellies) are 
bioluminescent. Food captured 
by nematocyst-bearing tentacles 
is transferred to specialized oral 
arms for transport to the mouth.
This cubozoan, a sea wasp, 
produces a poison that can 
subdue fish, crustaceans (as 
seen here), and other large 
prey. The poison is more 
potent than cobra venom.
Sea anemones and other 
anthozoans exist only as 
polyps. Many anthozoans 
form symbiotic relationships 
with photosynthetic algae.
These star corals live as colonies 
of polyps. Their soft bodies are 
enclosed at the base by a hard 
exoskeleton.
(a) Medusozoans
(b) Anthozoans 
. Figure 33.6  Cnidarians. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   746 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 748 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 747
Anthozoans
Sea anemones and corals belong to the clade Anthozoa (see 
Figure 33.6b). These cnidarians occur only as polyps. Corals 
live as solitary or colonial forms, often forming symbioses 
with algae. Many species secrete a hard exoskeleton (exter-
nal skeleton) of calcium carbonate. Each polyp generation 
builds on the skeletal remains of earlier generations, con-
structing rocklike reefs with shapes characteristic of their 
species. These skeletons are what we usually think of as coral.
Coral reefs are to tropical seas what rain forests are to tropi-
cal land areas: They provide habitat for many other species. 
Unfortunately, these reefs are being destroyed at an alarming 
rate. Pollution, overharvesting, and ocean acidification (see 
Figure 3.12) are major threats. Climate change is also contrib-
uting to their demise by raising seawater temperatures above 
the range in which corals thrive (see Concept 56.4).
MAKE CONNECTIONS Compare and contrast the Obelia life cycle to the life cycles in Figure 13.6.  
Which life cycle in that figure is most similar to that of Obelia? Explain. (See also Figure 29.5.)
     Some of the colony’s
polyps, equipped with
tentacles, are specialized
for feeding.
2
     Other polyps, specialized
for reproduction, lack
tentacles and produce tiny
medusae by asexual budding.
3
     The larva eventually settles
and develops into a new polyp.
6      The zygote develops into
a solid ciliated larva.
5
     Medusae swim
off, grow, and
reproduce sexually.
4
Feeding 
polyp
Reproductive
polyp
Medusa
bud
Larva
Zygote
Egg
Developing
polyp
Mature
polyp
Sperm
Medusa
Portion of
a colony
of polyps
Gonad
ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
(BUDDING)
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS
Key
Haploid (n)
Diploid (2n)
1 mm
1A colony of
interconnected
polyps (inset,
LM) results
from asexual
reproduction
by budding.
. Figure 33.7  The life cycle of the hydrozoan Obelia. The polyp is asexual, and the medusa 
 is sexual, releasing eggs and sperm. These two stages alternate, one producing the other.
CONCEPT CHECK 33.2
1. Compare and contrast the polyp and medusa forms of 
cnidarians.
2. VISUAL SKILLS Use the cnidarian life cycle diagram in 
Figure 33.7 to determine the ploidy of a feeding polyp and 
of a medusa.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Many new animal body plans 
emerged during and after the Cambrian explosion. In 
contrast, cnidarians today retain the same diploblastic,  
radial body plan found in cnidarians 560 million years ago.  
Are cnidarians therefore less successful or less “highly evolved” 
than other animal groups? Explain. (See Concepts 25.3  
and 25.6.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Animation: Coral  
Bleaching      
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   747 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 749 ===

748 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
means “flat worm.” (Note that worm is not a formal scientific 
name but rather refers to animals with long, thin bodies.) The 
smallest flatworms are nearly microscopic free-living species, 
while some tapeworms are more than 20 m long.
Although flatworms are triploblastic, they lack a body cav-
ity. Their flat shape increases their surface area, placing all 
their cells close to water in the surrounding environment or in 
their gut. Because of this proximity to water, gas exchange and 
the elimination of nitrogenous waste (ammonia) can occur by 
diffusion across the body surface. As shown in Figure 33.8, a 
flat shape is one of several structural features that maximize 
surface area and have arisen (by convergent evolution) in dif-
ferent groups of animals and other organisms.
As you might expect since all their cells are close to water, 
flatworms have no organs specialized for gas exchange, and 
their relatively simple excretory apparatus functions mainly to 
maintain osmotic balance with their surroundings. This appa-
ratus consists of protonephridia, networks of tubules with 
ciliated structures called flame bulbs that pull fluid through 
branched ducts opening to the outside (see Figure 44.8). Most 
flatworms have a gastrovascular cavity with only one opening. 
Though flatworms lack a circulatory system, the fine branches 
of the gastrovascular cavity distribute food directly to the 
 a n i m a l ’ s  c e l l s .
Early in their evolutionary history, flatworms separated 
into two lineages, Catenulida and Rhabditophora. Catenulida 
is a small clade of about 100 flatworm species, most of which 
live in freshwater habitats. Catenulids typically reproduce 
asexually by budding at their posterior end. The offspring 
often produce their own buds before detaching from the par-
ent, thereby forming a chain of two to four genetically identi-
cal individuals—hence their informal name, “chain worms.”
The other ancient flatworm lineage, Rhabditophora, is a 
diverse clade of about 20,000 freshwater and marine species, 
one example of which is shown in Figure 33.8. We’ll explore 
the rhabditophorans in more detail, focusing on free-living 
and parasitic members of this clade.
Free-Living Species
Free-living rhabditophorans are important as predators and 
scavengers in a wide range of freshwater and marine habitats. 
The best-known members of this group are freshwater spe-
cies in the genus Dugesia, commonly called planarians. 
Abundant in unpolluted ponds and streams, planarians prey 
on smaller animals or feed on dead animals. They move by 
using cilia on their ventral surface, gliding along a film of 
mucus they secrete. Some other rhabditophorans also use 
their muscles to swim through water with an undulating 
motion.
A planarian’s head features a pair of light-sensitive eye-
spots as well as lateral flaps that function mainly to detect 
specific chemicals. The planarian nervous system is more 
complex and centralized than the nerve nets of cnidarians 
CONCEPT 33.3 
Lophotrochozoans, a clade 
identified by molecular data, 
have the widest range of animal 
body forms
The vast majority of animal 
species belong to the clade 
Bilateria, whose members 
exhibit bilateral symmetry 
and are triploblastic (see 
Concept 32.3). Most bilaterians also have a digestive tract 
with two openings (a mouth and an anus) and a body cavity 
(a coelom or hemocoel; see Figure 32.9). Recent DNA analyses 
suggest that the common ancestor of living bilaterians lived 
about 670 million years ago. To date, however, the oldest 
fossil that is widely accepted as a bilaterian is of Kimberella, a 
mollusc (or close relative) that lived 560 million years ago (see 
Figure 32.5b). Many other bilaterian groups first appeared in 
the fossil record during the Cambrian explosion (535 to 525 
million years ago).
Molecular evidence suggests that today there are three major 
clades of bilaterally symmetrical animals: Lophotrochozoa, 
Ecdysozoa, and Deuterostomia. This section will focus on the 
first of these clades, the lophotrochozoans. Concepts 33.4 and 
33.5 will explore the other two clades.
Although the clade Lophotrochozoa was identified by 
molecular data, its name comes from features found in some 
of its members. Some lophotrochozoans develop a structure 
called a lophophore, a crown of ciliated tentacles that func-
tions in feeding, while others go through a distinctive stage 
called the trochophore larva (see Figure 32.12). Other mem-
bers of the group have neither of these features. Few other 
unique morphological features are widely shared within the 
group—in fact, the lophotrochozoans are the most diverse 
bilaterian clade in terms of body plan. This diversity in form 
is reflected in the number of phyla classified in the group: 
Lophotrochozoa includes 18 phyla, more than twice the 
number in any other clade of bilaterians.
We’ll now introduce six of the diverse lophotrochozoan 
phyla: the flatworms, rotifers and acanthocephalans, ecto-
procts, brachiopods, molluscs, and annelids.
Flatworms
Flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes) live in marine, fresh-
water, and damp terrestrial habitats. In addition to free-living 
species, flatworms include many parasitic species, such as 
flukes and tapeworms. Flatworms are so named because they 
have thin bodies that are flattened dorsoventrally (between 
the dorsal and ventral surfaces); the word platyhelminth 
Porifera
Cnidaria
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomia
BilateriaBilateria
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   748 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 750 ===

These diagrams compare surface area 
(SA) for two different shapes with the 
same volume (V).  Note which shape 
has the greater surface area.
Thylakoid
In general, the amount of metabolic or chemical activity a 
cell or organism can carry out is proportional to its mass 
or volume. Maximizing metabolic rate, however, requires 
the efƂcient uptaMe of energ[ and raY Oaterials sucJ as 
nutrients and oxygen, as well as the effective disposal of 
waste products. For large cells, plants, and animals, these 
exchange processes have the potential to be limiting 
due to simple geometry. When a cell or organism grows 
without changing shape, its volume increases more rapidly 
than its surface area (see Figure 7.7). As a result, there
is proportionately less surface area over which exchange
processes can occur. The challenge posed by the relation-
ship between surface area and volume occurs in diverse
contexts and organisms, but the evolutionary adaptations that meet this
challenge are similar. Structures that maximize surface area through branching,
ﬂattening folding and proLections JaXe an essential role in Diological s[steOs 
Water uptake relies on passive diffusion. The highly 
branched ﬁlaments of a fungal mycelium increase the 
surface area across which water and minerals can be 
absorbed from the environment (See Figure 31.2.). 
This TEM shows portions of two chloroplasts 
in a plant leaf. Photosynthesis occurs in 
chloroplasts, which have a ﬂattened 
and interconnected set of internal 
membranes called thylakoid 
membranes. The foldings of 
the thylakoid membranes 
increase their surface area, 
enhancing the exposure to 
light and thus increasing 
the rate of photosynthesis. 
(See Figure 11.4.)
In vertebrates, the small intestine is lined with ﬁnger-like 
projections called villi that absorb nutrients released 
by the digestion of food. Each of the villi shown 
here is covered with large numbers of  microscopic 
projections called microvilli,  resulting in a total
surface area of  about 300 m2 in a human, as 
large as a tennis court.
See Figure 42.12.)
By having a body 
that is only a few 
cells thick, an 
organism such as 
this ﬂatworm can 
use its entire body 
surface for exchange
(See Figure 40.3). 
Branching
Projections
Folding
Flattening
SA:  6 (3 cm 3 3 cm) 5 54 cm2
V:  3 cm 3 3 cm 3 
      3 cm 5 27 cm3
SA:  2 (3 cm 3 1 cm) 1 2 (9 cm 3 1 cm) 1 
        2 (3 cm 3 9 cm) 5 78 cm2
V:  1 cm 3 3 cm 3 9 cm 5 27 cm3
1 om
/uni25BC Figure 33.8 
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
Maximizing Surface Area
Find other examples of flattening, folding, branching, and 
projections (see Chapters 7, 10, 35, and 43). How is maximizing 
surface area important to the structure’s function in each example?
MAKE CONNECTIONS
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   749 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 751 ===

750 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
(Figure 33.9). Experiments have shown that planarians can 
learn to modify their responses to stimuli.
Some planarians can reproduce asexually through fission. 
The parent constricts roughly in the middle of its body, sepa-
rating into a head end and a tail end; each end then regen-
erates the missing parts. Sexual reproduction also occurs. 
Planarians are hermaphrodites, and copulating mates typi-
cally cross-fertilize each other.
Parasitic Species
More than half of the known species of rhabditophorans live 
as parasites in or on other animals. Many have suckers that 
attach to the internal organs or outer surfaces of the host 
animal. In most species, a tough covering helps protect the 
parasites within their hosts. We’ll discuss two ecologically 
and economically important subgroups of parasitic rhabdi-
tophorans, the trematodes and the tapeworms.
Trematodes As a group, trematodes parasitize a wide range 
of hosts, and most species have complex life cycles with alter-
nating sexual and asexual stages. Many trematodes require an 
intermediate host in which larvae develop before infecting the 
final host (usually a vertebrate), where the adult worms live. For 
example, various trematodes that parasitize humans spend part 
of their lives in snail hosts (Figure 33.10). Around the world, 
about 200 million people are infected with trematodes called 
blood flukes (Schistosoma) and suffer from schistosomiasis, a 
disease whose symptoms include pain, anemia, and diarrhea.
Living within more than one kind of host puts demands 
on trematodes that free-living animals don’t face. A blood 
fluke, for instance, must evade the immune systems of both 
Gastrovascular
cavity
Eyespots
Mouth
Ganglia. At the anterior end
of the worm, near the main sources
of sensory input, is a pair of ganglia,
dense clusters of nerve cells.
Digestion is completed within
the cells lining the gastrovas-
cular cavity, which has many
fine subbranches that provide
an extensive surface area.
Undigested wastes
are eliminated through 
an opening at the 
tip of the pharynx.
Pharynx. A muscular pharynx
can be extended through the
mouth. Digestive juices are 
spilled onto prey, and the
pharynx sucks small pieces of 
food into the gastrovascular 
cavity, where digestion continues.
Ventral nerve cords. From 
the ganglia, a pair of 
ventral nerve cords runs 
the length of the body.
. Figure 33.9  Anatomy of a planarian. 
1
4
2
5These larvae 
penetrate the skin 
and blood vessels 
of humans 
exposed to water 
contaminated 
with fluke 
larvae.
Asexual 
reproduction 
within a snail 
results in another 
type of motile larva, 
which escapes from 
the snail host.
3If the human 
feces or urine 
reach a source 
of water, the 
eggs develop into 
ciliated larvae. 
These larvae infect 
snails, the 
intermediate host.
Blood flukes 
reproduce sexually 
in the human host. 
The fertilized eggs 
exit the host in 
feces or urine.
Mature flukes live in the blood 
vessels of the human intestine. 
A female fluke fits into a groove 
running the length of the larger 
male’s body, as 
shown in the 
LM at right.
Male
Female
Fertilized
fluke egg
Fluke 
larva
Snail host
1 mm
. Figure 33.10  The life cycle of a blood  
fluke (Schistosoma mansoni),  
a trematode. 
WHAT IF? Snails eat algae, whose growth is stimulated by nutrients 
found in fertilizer. How would the contamination of irrigation water with 
fertilizer likely affect the occurrence of schistosomiasis? Explain.
snails and humans. By mimicking the surface proteins of 
its hosts, the blood fluke creates a partial immunological 
camouflage for itself. It also releases molecules that manipu-
late the hosts’ immune systems into tolerating the parasite’s 
existence. These defenses are so effective that individual 
blood flukes can survive in humans for more than 40 years.
Tapeworms The tapeworms are a second large and diverse 
group of parasitic rhabditophorans (Figure 33.11). The adults 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   750 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 752 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 751
Rotifers
There are roughly 1,800 species of rotifers, tiny animals that 
inhabit freshwater, marine, and damp soil habitats. Ranging 
in size from about 50 µm to 2 mm, rotifers are smaller than 
many protists but nevertheless are multicellular and have 
specialized organ systems (Figure 33.12). In contrast to cni-
darians and flatworms, which have a gastrovascular cavity, 
rotifers have an alimentary canal, a digestive tube with two 
openings, a mouth and an anus. Internal organs lie within the 
hemocoel (see Figure 32.9b). Fluid in the hemocoel serves as a 
hydrostatic skeleton. Movement of a rotifer’s body distributes 
the fluid throughout the body, circulating nutrients.
The word rotifer is derived from the Latin meaning “wheel-
bearer,” a reference to the crown of cilia that draws a vortex 
of water into the mouth. Posterior to the mouth, rotifers have 
jaws called trophi that grind up food, mostly microorganisms 
suspended in the water. Digestion is then completed farther 
along the alimentary canal. Most other bilaterians also have 
an alimentary canal, which enables the stepwise digestion of 
a wide range of food particles.
Rotifers exhibit some unusual forms of reproduction. 
Some species consist only of females that produce more 
females from unfertilized eggs, a type of asexual reproduc-
tion called parthenogenesis. Some other invertebrates (for 
example, aphids and some bees) and even some vertebrates 
(for example, some lizards and some fishes) can also repro-
duce in this way. In addition to being able to produce females 
by parthenogenesis, some rotifers can also reproduce sexually 
under certain conditions, such as high levels of crowding. 
The resulting embryos can remain dormant for years. Once 
they break dormancy, the embryos develop into another gen-
eration of females that reproduce asexually.
It is puzzling that many rotifer species persist with-
out males. The vast majority of animals and plants 
reproduce sexually at least some of the time, and sexual 
0.1 mm
Crown
of cilia
around
mouth
Jaws
Anus
Stomach
. Figure 33.12  A rotifer. Although smaller than many 
 unicellular protists, rotifers are multicellular and have specialized 
organ systems (LM).
Hooks
Sucker
Proglottids with
reproductive 
structures 100 om
Scolex
m Figure 33.11  Anatomy of a tapeworm. The inset shows 
 a close-up of the scolex (colorized SEM).
Rotifers and Acanthocephalans
Recent phylogenetic analyses have shown that two tradi-
tional animal phyla, the rotifers (former phylum Rotifera) 
and the acanthocephalans (former phylum Acanthocephala), 
should be combined into a single phylum, Syndermata. Each 
of the two groups has distinctive characteristics.
live mostly inside vertebrates, including hu-
mans. In many tapeworms, the anterior end, 
or scolex, is armed with suckers and often 
hooks that the worm uses to attach itself to 
the intestinal lining of its host. Tapeworms 
lack a mouth and gastrovascular cavity; they 
simply absorb nutrients released by diges-
tion in the host’s intestine. Absorption oc-
curs across the tapeworm’s body surface.
Posterior to the scolex is a long ribbon 
of units called proglottids, which are little 
more than sacs of sex organs. After sexual 
reproduction, proglottids loaded with thou-
sands of fertilized eggs are released from the 
posterior end of a tapeworm and leave the 
host’s body in feces. In one type of life cycle, 
feces carrying the eggs contaminate the food 
or water of intermediate hosts, such as pigs 
or cattle, and the tapeworm eggs develop 
into larvae that encyst in muscles of these 
animals. A human acquires the larvae by eat-
ing undercooked meat containing the cysts, 
and the worms develop into mature adults 
within the human. Large tapeworms can 
block the intestines and rob enough nutri-
ents from the human host to cause nutri-
tional deficiencies. Several different oral 
medications can kill the adult worms.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   751 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 753 ===

752 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
in ways that increase their chances of reaching their final 
hosts (generally vertebrates). For example, acanthocephalans 
that infect New Zealand mud crabs cause their hosts to move 
to more visible areas on the beach, where the crabs are more 
likely to be eaten by birds, the worms’ final hosts.
Ectoprocts and Brachiopods
Bilaterians in the phyla Ectoprocta and Brachiopoda have a 
lophophore, a crown of ciliated tentacles around their mouth 
(see Figure 32.12a). As the cilia draw water toward the mouth, 
the tentacles trap suspended food particles. Other similarities, 
such as a U-shaped alimentary canal and the absence of a dis-
tinct head, reflect these organisms’ sessile existence. In contrast 
to flatworms, which lack a body cavity, and rotifers, which 
have a hemocoel, ectoprocts and brachiopods have a coelom 
(see Figure 32.9a).
Ectoprocts (from the Greek ecto, outside, and procta, 
anus) are colonial animals that superficially resemble clumps 
of moss. (In fact, their common name, bryozoans, means 
“moss animals.”) In most species, the colony is encased in 
a hard exoskeleton studded with pores through which the 
lophophores extend (Figure 33.14a). Most ectoproct species 
live in the sea, where they are among the most widespread 
and numerous sessile animals. Several species are important 
reef builders. Ectoprocts also live in lakes and rivers. Colonies 
of the freshwater ectoproct Pectinatella magnifica grow on sub-
merged sticks or rocks and can grow into a gelatinous, ball-
shaped mass more than 10 cm across.
Brachiopods, or lamp shells, superficially resemble clams 
and other hinge-shelled molluscs, but the two halves of the 
brachiopod shell are dorsal and ventral rather than lateral, as 
in clams (Figure 33.14b). All brachiopods are marine. Most live 
attached to the seafloor by a stalk, opening their shell slightly 
to allow water to flow through the lophophore. The living 
brachiopods are remnants of a much richer past that included 
reproduction has certain advantages over asexual reproduc-
tion (see Concept 45.1). For example, species that reproduce 
asexually tend to accumulate harmful mutations in their 
genomes faster than sexually reproducing species. As a result, 
asexual species should experience higher rates of extinction.
Seeking to understand how they persist without males, 
researchers have been studying a clade of asexual rotifers 
named Bdelloidea. Some 360 species of bdelloid rotifers 
are known, and all of them reproduce by parthenogenesis 
without any males. Paleontologists have discovered bdelloid 
rotifers preserved in 35-million-year-old amber, and the mor-
phology of these fossils resembles only the female form, with 
no evidence of males. Molecular clock analyses indicate that 
bdelloids have been asexual for over 50 million years. While 
it appears that they do not reproduce sexually, bdelloid roti-
fers may be able to generate genetic diversity in other ways. 
For example, bdelloids can tolerate very high levels of desic-
cation. When conditions improve and their cells rehydrate, 
DNA from other species enters their cells through cracks in 
the plasma membrane. Recent evidence suggests that this 
foreign DNA can be incorporated into the bdelloids’ genome, 
thereby leading to increased genetic diversity.
Acanthocephalans
Acanthocephalans (1,100 species) are sexually reproducing 
parasites of vertebrates that lack a complete digestive tract 
and usually are less than 20 cm long. They are commonly 
called spiny-headed worms because of the curved hooks on 
the proboscis at the anterior end of their body (Figure 33.13). 
Acanthocephalans are triploblastic and, like rotifers, they 
have a hemocoel. Recent studies have shown that acantho-
cephalans originated from within the group traditionally 
known as Rotifera. In particular, rotifers in the genus Seison 
share a more recent common ancestor with acanthocepha-
lans than they do with other rotifers, making the acantho-
cephalans a group of highly modified “rotifers.”
All acanthocephalans are parasites that have complex life 
cycles with two or more hosts. Some species manipulate the 
behavior of their intermediate hosts (generally arthropods) 
Lophophore Lophophore
(a) Ectoprocts, such as this creeping 
bryozoan (Plumatella repens), 
are colonial.
(b) Brachiopods, such as this 
lampshell (Terebratulina 
retusa), have a hinged shell. 
The two parts of the shell are 
dorsal and ventral.
. Figure 33.14  Ectoprocts and brachiopods. 
50 om
200 om
b Figure 33.13  
Paratenuisentis ambiguus, 
an acanthocephalan. The 
inset photograph shows the 
curved hooks that give the 
spiny-headed worms their 
name.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   752 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 754 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 753
The basic body plan of molluscs has evolved in various 
ways in the phylum’s eight major clades. We’ll examine four 
of those clades here: Polyplacophora (chitons), Gastropoda 
(snails and slugs), Bivalvia (clams, oysters, and other 
bivalves), and Cephalopoda (squids, octopuses, cuttlefishes, 
and chambered nautiluses). We will then focus on threats fac-
ing some groups of molluscs.
Chitons
Chitons have an oval-shaped body and a shell composed of 
eight dorsal plates (Figure 33.16). The chiton’s body itself, 
however, is unsegmented. You can find these marine animals 
clinging to rocks along the shore during low tide. If you try to 
dislodge a chiton by hand, you will be surprised at how well 
its foot, acting as a suction cup, grips the rock. A chiton can 
also use its foot to creep slowly over the rock surface. Chitons 
use their radula to scrape algae off the rock surface.
30,000 species in the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras. Some living 
brachiopods, such as those in the genus Lingula, appear nearly 
identical to fossils of species that lived 400 million years ago.
Molluscs
Snails and slugs, oysters and clams, and octopuses and squids 
are all molluscs (phylum Mollusca). There are over 100,000 
known species, making them the second most diverse 
phylum of animals (after the arthropods, discussed later). 
Although the majority of molluscs are marine, roughly 8,000 
species inhabit fresh water, and 28,000 species of snails and 
slugs live on land. All molluscs are soft-bodied, and most 
secrete a hard protective shell made of calcium carbonate. 
Slugs, squids, and octopuses have a reduced internal shell or 
have lost their shell completely during their evolution.
Despite their apparent differences, all molluscs have a 
similar body plan (Figure 33.15). The primary body cavity is 
a hemocoel, but they also have a reduced coelom. The body 
of a mollusc has three main parts: a muscular foot, usually 
used for movement; a visceral mass containing most of the 
internal organs; and a mantle, a fold of tissue that drapes 
over the visceral mass and secretes a shell (if one is present). 
In many molluscs, the mantle extends beyond the visceral 
mass, producing a water-filled chamber, the mantle cavity, 
which houses the gills, anus, and excretory pores. Many mol-
luscs feed by using a straplike organ called a radula to scrape 
up food.
Most molluscs have separate sexes, and their gonads (ova-
ries or testes) are located in the visceral mass. Many snails, 
however, are hermaphrodites. The life cycle of many marine 
molluscs includes a ciliated larval stage, the trochophore (see 
Figure 32.12b), which is also characteristic of marine annelids 
(segmented worms) and some other lophotrochozoans.
Coelom
Mantle
cavity Shell
Nerve
cords
Anus
Gonads
Intestine
Mouth
Stomach
Gill
Radula
Mouth
EsophagusHemocoel
Mantle
Visceral mass
Foot
Metanephridium. Excretory organs 
called metanephridia remove metabolic 
wastes from the hemolymph.
The nervous system 
consists of a nerve 
ring around the 
esophagus, from 
which nerve cords 
extend.
Radula. The mouth 
region in many 
mollusc species 
contains a rasp-like 
feeding organ 
called a radula. This 
belt of backward-
curved teeth 
repeatedly thrusts 
outward and then 
retracts into the 
mouth, scraping 
and scooping like a 
backhoe.   
The long digestive tract is 
coiled in the visceral mass.
Heart. Most molluscs have an open circulatory 
system. The dorsally located heart pumps 
circulatory fluid called hemolymph through arteries 
into sinuses (body spaces). The organs of the 
mollusc are thus continually bathed in hemolymph. 
. Figure 33.15  The basic body plan of a mollusc. 
. Figure 33.16  A chiton. Note the eight-plate shell characteristic 
of molluscs in the clade Polyplacophora.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   753 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 755 ===

754 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
or plants. Several groups, however, are predators, and their rad-
ula has become modified for boring holes in the shells of other 
molluscs or for tearing apart prey. In the cone snails, the teeth 
of the radula act as poison darts that are used to subdue prey.
Gastropods
About three-quarters of all living species of molluscs are 
gastropods (Figure 33.17). Most gastropods are marine, but 
there are also freshwater species. Still other gastropods have 
adapted to life on land, where snails and slugs thrive in habi-
tats ranging from deserts to rain forests.
Gastropods move literally at a snail’s pace by a rippling 
motion of their foot or by means of cilia—a slow process that 
can leave them vulnerable to attack. Most gastropods have a 
single, spiraled shell into which the animal can retreat when 
threatened. The shell, which is secreted by glands at the edge 
of the mantle, has several functions, including protecting the 
animal’s soft body from injury and dehydration. One of its 
most important roles is as a defense against predators, as is dem-
onstrated by comparing populations with different histories 
of predation (see the Scientific Skills Exercise). As they move 
slowly about, most gastropods use their radula to graze on algae 
(a) A land snail 
(b) A sea slug. Nudibranchs, or sea slugs, 
lost their shell during their evolution.
m Figure 33.17   
Gastropods. The many 
species of gastropods have 
colonized terrestrial as well 
 as aquatic environments.
Understanding Experimental Design and Interpreting Data
Scientific Skills Exercise 
Is There Evidence of Selection for Defensive Adaptations in 
Mollusc Populations Exposed to Predators? The fossil record 
shows that historically, increased risk to prey species from predators 
is often accompanied by increased incidence and expression of prey 
defenses. Researchers tested whether populations of the predatory 
European green crab (Carcinus maenas) have exerted similar selec-
tive pressures on its gastropod prey, the flat periwinkle (Littorina  
obtusata). Periwinkles from southern sites 
in the Gulf of Maine have experienced pre-
dation by European green crabs for over 
100 generations, at about one generation 
per year. Periwinkles from northern sites 
in the Gulf have been interacting with the 
invasive green crabs for relatively few gen-
erations, as the invasive crabs spread to 
the northern Gulf comparatively recently.
Previous research shows that  
(1) periwinkle shells recently collected 
from the Gulf are thicker than those 
collected in the late 1800s, and (2) periwinkle populations from 
southern sites have thicker shells than periwinkle populations from 
northern sites. In this exercise, you’ll interpret the design and results 
of the researchers’ experiment studying the rates of predation by 
crabs on periwinkles from northern and southern populations.
How the Experiment Was Done T h e  r e s e a r c h e r s  c o l l e c t e d  p e r i-
winkles and crabs from sites in the northern and southern Gulf of 
Maine, separated by 450 km of coastline. A single crab was placed 
in a cage with eight periwinkles of different sizes. After three days, 
researchers assessed the fate of the eight periwinkles. Four different 
treatments were set up, with crabs from northern or southern popu-
lations offered periwinkles from northern and southern populations. 
All crabs were of similar size and included equal numbers of males 
and females. Each experimental treatment was tested 12 to 14 times.
In a second part of the experiment, the bodies of periwinkles from 
northern and southern populations were removed from their shells 
and presented to crabs from northern and southern populations.
Data from the Experiment
Average number of 
periwinkles killed
0
6
4
2
Southern Northern
Source population of crab
Northern 
periwinkles
Southern 
periwinkles
Data from R. Rochette et al., Interaction between an invasive decapod and a na-
tive gastropod: Predator foraging tactics and prey architectural defenses, Marine 
Ecology Progress Series 330:179–188 (2007).
When the researchers presented the crabs with unshelled 
periwinkles, all the unshelled periwinkles were consumed in less 
than an hour.
INTERPRET THE DATA
1. What hypotheses were the researchers testing in this study? 
What are the independent variables? What are the dependent 
variables?
2. Why did the research team set up four different treatments?
3. Why did researchers present unshelled periwinkles to the crabs? 
What do the results of this part of the experiment indicate?
4. Summarize the results of the experiment. Do these results sup-
port the hypothesis you identified in question 1? Explain.
5. Suggest how natural selection may have affected popula-
tions of flat periwinkles in the southern Gulf of Maine over 
the last 100 years.
  Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
. A periwinkle
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   754 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 756 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 755
suspension feeders. They trap small food particles in mucus 
that coats their gills, and cilia then convey those particles to 
the mouth. Water enters the mantle cavity through an incur-
rent siphon, passes over the gills, and then exits the mantle 
cavity through an excurrent siphon.
Most bivalves lead sedentary lives, a characteristic suited to 
suspension feeding. Mussels secrete strong threads that tether 
them to rocks, docks, boats, and the shells of other animals. 
However, clams can pull themselves into the sand or mud, 
using their muscular foot for an anchor, and scallops can skit-
ter along the seafloor by flapping their shells, rather like the 
mechanical false teeth sold in novelty shops.
Cephalopods
Cephalopods are active marine predators (Figure 33.20). 
They use their tentacles to grasp prey, which they then bite 
with beak-like jaws and immobilize with a poison present in 
their saliva. The foot of a cephalopod has become modified 
into a muscular excurrent siphon and part of the tentacles. 
Squids dart about by drawing water into their mantle cavity 
and then firing a jet of water through the excurrent siphon; 
they steer by pointing the siphon in different directions. 
Octopuses use a similar mechanism to escape predators.
The mantle covers the visceral mass of cephalopods, but 
the shell is generally reduced and internal (in most species) or 
missing altogether (in some cuttlefishes and some octopuses). 
Many gastropods have a head with eyes at the tips of ten-
tacles. Terrestrial snails lack the gills typical of most aquatic 
gastropods. Instead, the lining of their mantle cavity func-
tions as a lung, exchanging respiratory gases with the air.
Bivalves
The molluscs of the clade Bivalvia are all aquatic and include 
many species of clams, oysters, mussels, and scallops. Bivalves 
have a shell divided into two halves (Figure 33.18). The 
halves are hinged, and powerful adductor muscles draw them 
tightly together to protect the animal’s soft body. Bivalves 
have no distinct head, and the radula has been lost. Some 
bivalves have eyes and sensory tentacles along the outer edge 
of their mantle.
The gills of bivalves are used for feeding as well as gas 
exchange in most species (Figure 33.19). Most bivalves are 
. Figure 33.18  A bivalve. This scallop has many eyes (dark blue 
spots) lining each half of its hinged shell.
Mantle
Shell
Mouth
Hinge area Coelom
Palp
Foot
Gonad
Digestive
gland
Gill
Incurrent
siphon
Excurrent
siphon
Anus
Adductor muscle
(one of two)
Water
flow
HeartGut
. Figure 33.19  Anatomy of a clam. Food particles suspended in 
water that enters through the incurrent siphon are collected by the 
gills and passed via cilia and the palps to the mouth.
b
c Squids are speedy 
carnivores with 
beak-like jaws and 
well-developed eyes.
c Chambered
    nautiluses are
    the only living
    cephalopods with
    an external shell.
Octopuses are 
considered
among the 
most intelligent 
invertebrates.
. Figure 33.20  Cephalopods. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   755 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 757 ===

756 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
900 m. M. hamiltoni has yet to be observed in nature. Overall, 
much remains to be learned about these marine giants.
Protecting Freshwater and Terrestrial Molluscs
Species extinction rates have increased dramatically in the 
last 400 years, raising concern that a sixth, human-caused 
mass extinction may be under way (see Concept 25.4). 
Among the many taxa under threat, molluscs have the dubi-
ous distinction of being the animal group with the largest 
number of documented extinctions (Figure 33.21).
Threats to molluscs are especially severe in two groups: fresh-
water bivalves and terrestrial gastropods. For example, the pearl 
mussels, a group of freshwater bivalves that can make natural 
pearls (gems that form when a mussel or oyster secretes layers of 
a lustrous coating around a grain of sand or other small irritant), 
are among the world’s most endangered animals. Roughly 10% 
of the 300 pearl mussel species that once lived in North America 
have become extinct in the last 100 years, and over two-thirds 
of those that remain are threatened by extinction. Terrestrial 
gastropods, such as the snail in Figure 33.21, are faring no bet-
ter. Hundreds of Pacific island land snails have disappeared 
since 1800. Overall, more than 50% of the Pacific island land 
snails are extinct or under imminent threat of extinction.
Threats faced by freshwater and terrestrial molluscs 
include habitat loss, pollution, competition or predation by 
non-native species, and overharvesting by humans. Is it too 
late to protect these molluscs? In some locations, reducing 
water pollution and changing how water is released from 
dams have led to dramatic rebounds in pearl mussel popula-
tions. Such results provide hope that with corrective mea-
sures, other endangered mollusc species can be revived.
One small group of cephalopods with external shells, the 
chambered nautiluses, survives today.
Cephalopods are the only molluscs with a closed circulatory 
system, in which the blood remains separate from fluid in the 
body cavity. They also have well-developed sense organs and 
a complex brain. The ability to learn and behave in a complex 
manner is probably more critical to fast-moving predators 
than to sedentary animals such as clams.
The ancestors of octopuses and squids were probably 
shelled molluscs that took up a predatory lifestyle; the 
shell was lost in later evolution. Shelled cephalopods called 
ammonites, some of them as large as truck tires, were the 
dominant invertebrate predators of the seas for hundreds of 
millions of years until their disappearance during the mass 
extinction at the end of the Cretaceous period, 66 million 
years ago.
Most species of squid are less than 75 cm long, but some 
are much larger. The giant squid (Architeuthis dux), for exam-
ple, has an estimated maximum length of 13 m for females 
and 10 m for males. The colossal squid (Mesonychoteuthis 
hamiltoni), is even larger, with an estimated maximum 
length of 14 m. Unlike A. dux, which has large suckers and 
small teeth on its tentacles, M. hamiltoni has two rows of 
sharp hooks at the ends of its tentacles that can inflict 
deadly lacerations.
It is likely that A. dux and M. hamiltoni spend most of their 
time in the deep ocean, where they may feed on large fishes. 
Remains of both giant squid species have been found in the 
stomachs of sperm whales, which are probably their only 
natural predator. Scientists first photographed A. dux in the 
wild in 2005 while it was attacking baited hooks at a depth of 
MAKE CONNECTIONS Freshwater bivalves 
feed on and can reduce the abundance of 
photosynthetic protists and bacteria. As such, 
what types of effects would the extinction 
of freshwater bivalves likely have on aquatic 
communities (see Concept 28.6)?
Amphibians
Other 
invertebrates
Insects
Fishes
Mammals Reptiles (excluding birds)
Birds
Molluscs
m Workers on a mound of pearl mussels killed to make buttons (ca. 1919)
▲ Recorded extinctions of animal species
b An endangered 
Pacific island 
land snail, 
Partula suturalis
. Figure 33.21  The silent extinction. Molluscs account for a largely unheralded but 
sobering 40% of all documented extinctions of animal species. These extinctions have resulted 
from human actions such as habitat loss and overharvesting. Many pearl mussel populations, 
for example, were driven to extinction by overharvesting for their shells, which were used to 
make buttons and other goods. Land snails are highly vulnerable to the same threats; like pearl 
mussels, they are among the world’s most imperiled animal groups.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   756 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 758 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 757
Each parapodium has numerous chaetae. (Possession of 
parapodia with numerous chaetae is not unique to Errantia, 
however, as some members of the other major clade of anne-
lids, Sedentaria, also have these features.) In many species, 
the parapodia are richly supplied with blood vessels and also 
function as gills. Errantians also tend to have well-developed 
jaws and sensory organs, as might be expected of predators or 
grazers that move about in search of food.
Sedentarians
Species in the other major clade of annelids, Sedentaria (from 
the Latin sedere, sit), tend to be less mobile than those in 
Errantia. Some species burrow slowly through marine sediments 
or soil, while others live within tubes that protect and support 
their soft bodies. Tube-dwelling sedentarians often have elabo-
rate gills or tentacles used for filter feeding (Figure 33.23).
Although the Christmas tree worm shown in Figure 33.23 
once was classified as a “polychaete,” current evidence indi-
cates it is a sedentarian. The clade Sedentaria also contains 
former “oligochaetes,” including the two groups we turn to 
next, the leeches and the earthworms.
Leeches S o m e  l e e c h e s  a r e  p a r a s i t e s  t h a t  s u c k  b l o o d  b y  a t-
taching temporarily to other animals, including humans 
(Figure 33.24), but most are predators that feed on other 
Annelids
Annelida means “little rings,” referring to the annelid body’s 
resemblance to a series of fused rings. Annelids are segmented 
worms that live in the sea, in most freshwater habitats, and 
in damp soil. Annelids, which have a coelom (and no hemo-
coel), range in length from less than 1 mm to more than 3 m.
Traditionally, the phylum Annelida was divided into three 
main groups, Polychaeta (the polychaetes), Oligochaeta (the 
oligochaetes), and Hirudinea (the leeches). The names of the 
first two of these groups reflected the relative number of chae-
tae, bristles made of chitin, on their bodies: polychaetes (from 
the Greek poly, many, and chait!, long hair) have many more 
chaetae per segment than do oligochaetes.
However, a 2011 phylogenomic study and other recent 
molecular analyses have indicated that the oligochaetes are 
a subgroup of the polychaetes, making the polychaetes (as 
defined morphologically) a paraphyletic group. Likewise, 
the leeches have been shown to be a subgroup of the oligo-
chaetes. As a result, these traditional names are no longer 
used to describe the evolutionary history of the annelids. 
Instead, current evidence indicates that the annelids can be 
divided into two major clades, Errantia and Sedentaria—a 
grouping that reflects broad differences in lifestyle.
Errantians
Clade Errantia (from the Old French errant, traveling) is a 
large and diverse group, most of whose members are marine 
(Figure 33.22). As their name suggests, many errantians are 
mobile; some swim among the plankton (small, drifting 
organisms), while many others crawl on or burrow in the 
seafloor. Many are predators, while others are grazers that 
feed on large, multicellular algae. The group also includes 
some relatively immobile species, such as the tube-dwelling 
Platynereis, a marine species that recently has become a model 
organism for studying neurobiology and development.
In many errantians, each body segment has a pair of prom-
inent paddle-like or ridge-like structures called parapodia 
(“beside feet”) that function in locomotion (see Figure 33.22). 
Parapodia
Cirri
. Figure 33.22  An errantian, the predator Nereimyra punctata. 
This marine annelid ambushes prey from burrows it has constructed 
on the seafloor. N. punctata hunts by touch, detecting its prey with 
long sensory organs called cirri that extend from the burrow.
. Figure 33.23  The Christmas tree worm, Spirobranchus 
giganteus. This sedentarian’s two tree-shaped whorls are tentacles, 
which it uses in gas exchange and to collect food particles from 
the water. The tentacles emerge from a calcium carbonate tube 
secreted by the worm that protects and supports its soft body.
c Figure 33.24  A leech. A 
nurse applied this medicinal 
leech (Hirudo medicinalis) to a 
patient’s sore thumb to drain 
blood from a hematoma (an 
abnormal accumulation of 
blood around an internal injury).
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   757 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 759 ===

758 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
invertebrates. Leeches range in length from 1 to 30 cm. Most 
leeches inhabit fresh water, but there are also marine species 
and terrestrial leeches, which live in moist vegetation. Some 
parasitic species use bladelike jaws to slit the skin of their host. 
The host is usually oblivious to this attack because the leech 
secretes an anesthetic. After making the incision, the leech 
secretes a chemical, hirudin, which keeps the blood of the host 
from coagulating near the incision. The parasite then sucks as 
much blood as it can hold, often more than ten times its own 
weight. After this gorging, a leech can last for months without 
another meal.
Until the 20th century, leeches were frequently used for 
bloodletting. Today they are used to drain blood that accu-
mulates in tissues following certain injuries or surgeries. In 
addition, forms of hirudin produced with recombinant DNA 
techniques can be used to dissolve unwanted blood clots that 
form during surgery or as a result of heart disease.
Earthworms Earthworms eat their way through the soil, 
extracting nutrients as the soil passes through the alimentary 
canal. Undigested material, mixed with mucus secreted into the 
canal, is eliminated as fecal castings through the anus. Farmers 
value earthworms because the animals till and aerate the earth, 
and their castings improve the texture of the soil. (Charles 
Darwin estimated that one acre of farmland contains about 
50,000 earthworms, producing 18 tons of castings per year.)
A guided tour of the anatomy of an earthworm, which 
is representative of annelids, is shown in Figure 33.25. 
Cuticle
Septum
(partition
between
segments)
Circular
muscle
Longitudinal
muscle
Fused
nerve
cords
Anus
Epidermis
Nephrostome
Esophagus
Intestine
Dorsal
vessel
Clitellum
Intestine
Mouth
CropPharynx
Gizzard
Ventral
vessel
Subpharyngeal
ganglion
Metanephridium
Giant Australian earthworm
Each segment is surrounded by longitudinal muscle, which in
turn is surrounded by circular muscle. Earthworms coordinate 
the contraction of these two sets of muscles to move.
Coelom. The coelom 
of the earthworm is 
partitioned by septa.
The circulatory system, a network of vessels, 
is closed. The dorsal and ventral vessels are 
linked by segmental pairs of vessels, some of 
which are muscular and pump blood through 
the circulatory system.
Many of the internal 
structures are repeated 
within each segment of 
the earthworm.
Metanephridium. Each 
segment of the worm 
contains a pair of 
excretory tubules, called 
metanephridia, that 
discharge wastes from the 
blood and coelomic fluid 
through exterior pores.
Chaetae. Each segment 
has four pairs of 
chaetae, bristles that 
provide traction for 
burrowing.
Ventral nerve cords. The nerve cords 
penetrate the septa and run the length 
of the animal, as do the digestive tract 
and longitudinal blood vessels.
Tiny blood 
vessels are 
abundant in the 
earthworm’s 
skin, which 
functions as its 
respiratory 
organ.
Cerebral ganglia. The earthworm 
nervous system features a brain-
like pair of cerebral ganglia above 
and in front of the pharynx. A 
ring of nerves around the pharynx 
connects to a subpharyngeal 
ganglion, from which a fused pair 
of nerve cords runs posteriorly.
m Figure 33.25  Anatomy of an  
earthworm, a sedentarian. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   758 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 760 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 759
Multitudes of nematodes live in moist soil and in 
decomposing organic matter on the bottoms of lakes and 
oceans. While 25,000 species are known, perhaps 20 times 
that number actually exist. These free-living worms play 
an important role in decomposition and nutrient cycling, 
but little is known about most species. One species of soil 
nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, however, is very well stud-
ied and has become a model research organism in biology 
(see Concept 46.3). Ongoing studies of C. elegans are provid-
ing insight into mechanisms involved in aging in humans, as 
well as many other topics.
Phylum Nematoda includes many species that parasitize 
plants, and some are major agricultural pests that attack the 
roots of crops. Other nematodes parasitize animals. Some 
of these species benefit humans by attacking insects such as 
cutworms that feed on the roots of crop plants. On the other 
hand, humans are hosts to at least 50 nematode species, 
including various pinworms and hookworms. One notori-
ous nematode is Trichinella spiralis, the worm that causes 
trichinosis (Figure 33.27). Humans acquire this nematode 
by eating raw or undercooked pork or other meat (including 
wild game such as bear or walrus) that has juvenile worms 
encysted in the muscle tissue. Within the human intestines, 
the juveniles develop into sexually mature adults. Females 
Earthworms are hermaphrodites, but they do cross-fertilize. 
Two earthworms mate by aligning themselves in opposite 
directions in such a way that they exchange sperm, and then 
they separate. Some earthworms can also reproduce asexually 
by fragmentation followed by regeneration.
As a group, Lophotrochozoa encompasses a remarkable 
range of body plans, as illustrated by members of such phyla 
as Syndermata, Ectoprocta, Mollusca, and Annelida. Next 
we’ll explore the diversity of Ecdysozoa, a dominant presence 
on Earth in terms of sheer number of species.
CONCEPT CHECK 33.3
1. Explain how tapeworms can survive without a body cavity, a 
mouth, a digestive system, or an excretory system.
2. Annelid anatomy can be described as “a tube within a tube.” 
Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how the molluscan foot in 
gastropods and the excurrent siphon in cephalopods represent 
examples of descent with modification (see Concept 21.2).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 33.4 
Ecdysozoans are the most 
species-rich animal group
Although defined primarily 
by molecular evidence, the 
clade Ecdysozoa includes ani-
mals that shed a cuticle (a 
tough external coat) as they 
grow. In fact, the group derives its name from this process, 
which is called ecdysis, or molting. Ecdysozoa includes about 
eight animal phyla and contains more known species than 
all other animal, protist, fungus, and plant groups combined. 
Here we’ll focus on the two largest ecdysozoan phyla, the 
nematodes and arthropods, which are among the most suc-
cessful and abundant of all animal groups.
Nematodes
Among the most ubiquitous of animals, nematodes (phy-
lum Nematoda), or roundworms, are found in most aquatic 
habitats, in the soil, in the moist tissues of plants, and in the 
body fluids and tissues of animals. The cylindrical bodies 
of nematodes range from less than 1 mm to more than 1 m 
long, often tapering to a fine tip at the posterior end and to a 
blunter tip at the anterior end (Figure 33.26). A nematode’s 
body is covered by a tough cuticle (a type of exoskeleton); 
as the worm grows, it periodically sheds its old cuticle and 
secretes a new, larger one. Nematodes have an alimentary 
canal, though they lack a circulatory system. Nutrients are 
transported throughout the body via fluid in the hemocoel. 
The body wall muscles are all longitudinal, and their contrac-
tion produces a thrashing motion.
Porifera
Cnidaria
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomia
c Figure 33.26   
A free-living 
nematode. 
(colorized SEM)
Encysted juveniles Muscle tissue 50 om
. Figure 33.27  Juveniles of the parasitic nematode 
Trichinella spiralis encysted in human muscle tissue. (LM)
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   759 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 761 ===

760 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
continued to evolve, groups of segments tended to become 
functionally united into “body regions” specialized for tasks 
such as feeding, walking, or swimming. These evolutionary 
changes resulted not only in great diversification but also in 
efficient body plans that permit the division of labor among 
different body regions.
burrow into the intestinal muscles and produce more juve-
niles, which bore through the body or travel in lymphatic 
vessels to other organs, including skeletal muscles, where 
they encyst.
Parasitic nematodes have an extraordinary molecular tool-
kit that enables them to redirect some of the cellular func-
tions of their hosts. Some species inject their plant hosts with 
molecules that induce the development of root cells, which 
then supply nutrients to the parasites. When Trichinella para-
sitizes animals, it regulates the expression of specific muscle 
cell genes encoding proteins that make the cell elastic enough 
to house the nematode. Additionally, the infected muscle cell 
releases signals that promote the growth of new blood vessels, 
which then supply the nematode with nutrients.
Arthropods
Zoologists estimate that there are about a billion billion (1018) 
arthropods living on Earth. More than 1 million arthropod 
species have been described, most of which are insects. In 
fact, two out of every three known species are arthropods, 
and members of the phylum Arthropoda can be found in 
nearly all habitats of the biosphere. By the criteria of species 
diversity, distribution, and sheer numbers, arthropods must 
be regarded as the most successful of all animal phyla.
Arthropod Origins
Biologists hypothesize that the diversity and success of 
arthropods are related to their body plan—their segmented 
body, hard exoskeleton, and jointed appendages. How did 
this body plan arise and what advantages did it provide?
The earliest fossils of arthropods are from the Cambrian 
explosion (535–525 million years ago), indicating that the 
arthropods are at least that old. The fossil record of the 
Cambrian explosion also contains many species of lobopods, 
a group from which arthropods may have evolved. Lobopods 
such as Hallucigenia (see Figure 32.7) had segmented bodies, 
but most of their body segments were identical to one another. 
Early arthropods, such as the trilobites, also showed little vari-
ation from segment to segment (Figure 33.28). As arthropods 
c Figure 33.28  A trilobite 
fossil. Trilobites were common 
denizens of the shallow seas 
throughout the Paleozoic 
era but disappeared with the 
great Permian extinctions 
about 250 million years ago. 
Paleontologists have described 
about 4,000 trilobite species.
/uni25BC Figure 33.29  Inquiry
Did the arthropod body plan result from new 
Hox genes?
Experiment One hypothesis suggests that the arthropod 
body plan resulted from the origin (by gene duplication and 
subsequent mutations) of two unusual Hox genes found in 
arthropods: Ultrabithorax (Ubx) and abdominal-A (abd-A). 
Researchers tested this hypothesis using onychophorans, a 
group of invertebrates closely related to arthropods. Unlike 
many living arthropods, onychophorans have a body plan in 
which most body segments are identical to one another. If the 
origin of the Ubx and abd-A Hox genes drove the evolution of 
body segment diversity in arthropods, these genes probably 
arose on the arthropod branch of the evolutionary tree:
Origin of Ubx and
abd-A Hox genes?
Common ancestor of
onychophorans and arthropods
Other
ecdysozoans
Arthropods
Onychophorans
According to this hypothesis, Ubx and abd-A would not have 
been present in the common ancestor of arthropods and 
onychophorans; hence, onychophorans should not have these 
genes. The researchers examined the Hox genes of the ony-
chophoran Acanthokara kaputensis.
Results T h e  o n y c h o p h o r a n  A. kaputensis has all arthropod 
Hox genes, including Ubx and abd-A.
Red indicates the
body regions of this
onychophoran embryo
in which Ubx or
abd-A genes were
expressed. (The
inset shows this
area enlarged.)
Ant = antenna
J = jaws
L1–L15 = body segments
Conclusion The evolution of increased body segment diversity 
in arthropods was not related to the origin of new Hox genes.
Data from J. K. Grenier et al., Evolution of the entire arthropod Hox gene set 
predated the origin and radiation of the onychophoran/arthropod clade, Current 
Biology 7:547–553 (1997).
WHAT IF? Suppose A. kaputensis did not have the Ubx and abd-A 
Hox genes. How would the conclusions of this study have been 
affected? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   760 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 762 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 761
millipedes, centipedes, spiders, and a variety of wingless 
insects all had colonized land.
Arthropods have well-developed sensory organs, includ-
ing eyes, olfactory (smell) receptors, and antennae that 
function in both touch and smell. Most sensory organs are 
concentrated at the anterior end of the animal, although 
there are interesting exceptions. Female butterflies, for 
example, “taste” plants using sensory organs on their feet.
Like many molluscs, arthropods have an open circulatory 
system, in which fluid called hemolymph is propelled by a 
heart through short arteries and then into the hemocoel—the 
body cavity surrounding the tissues and organs. (The term 
blood is generally reserved for fluid in a closed circulatory sys-
tem.) Hemolymph reenters the arthropod heart through pores 
that are usually equipped with valves. In most arthropods, the 
coelom that forms in the embryo becomes much reduced as 
development progresses, and the hemocoel becomes the main 
body cavity in adults.
A variety of specialized gas exchange organs have evolved 
in arthropods. These organs allow the diffusion of respiratory 
gases in spite of the exoskeleton. Most aquatic species have 
gills with thin, feathery extensions that expose a large surface 
area to the surrounding water. Terrestrial arthropods generally 
have internal surfaces specialized for gas exchange. For exam-
ple, most insects have tracheal systems, branched air ducts 
leading into the interior of the body from pores in the cuticle.
Morphological and molecular data suggest that living 
arthropods consist of three major lineages that diverged early 
in the phylum’s evolution: chelicerates (sea spiders, horse-
shoe crabs, scorpions, ticks, mites, and spiders); myriapods 
Head
Thorax
Antennae
(sensory
reception)
Post-genital 
region (“tail”)
Genital region
(on underside)
Swimming appen-
dages (one pair per
tail segment)
Walking legs
Mouthparts 
(feeding)
Pincer
(defense)
c Figure 33.30  External anatomy of an arthropod. 
Many of the distinctive features of arthropods are 
apparent in this dorsal view of a lobster. The body is 
segmented, but this character is obvious only in the post-
genital region or “tail,” located behind the genitals. The 
appendages (including antennae, pincers, mouthparts, walking 
legs, and swimming appendages) are jointed. The head bears a 
pair of compound (multilens) eyes. The whole body, including 
appendages, is covered by an exoskeleton.
What genetic changes led to the increasing complexity 
of the arthropod body plan? Arthropods today have two 
unusual Hox genes, both of which influence segmentation. 
To test whether these genes could have driven the evolution 
of increased body segment diversity in arthropods, research-
ers studied Hox genes in onychophorans (see Figure 33.2), 
close relatives of arthropods (Figure 33.29). Their results indi-
cate that the diversity of arthropod body plans did not arise 
from the acquisition of new Hox genes. Instead, the evolution 
of body segment diversity in arthropods was probably driven 
by changes in the sequence or regulation of existing Hox 
genes (see Concept 25.5).
General Characteristics of Arthropods
Over the course of evolution, the appendages of some arthro-
pods have become modified, specializing in functions such 
as walking, feeding, sensory reception, reproduction, and 
defense. Like the appendages from which they were derived, 
these modified structures are jointed and come in pairs. 
Figure 33.30 illustrates the diverse appendages and other 
arthropod characteristics of a lobster.
The body of an arthropod is completely covered by the 
cuticle, an exoskeleton constructed from layers of protein 
and the polysaccharide chitin. As you know if you’ve ever 
eaten a crab or lobster, the cuticle can be thick and hard over 
some parts of the body and thin and flexible over others, such 
as the joints. The rigid exoskeleton protects the animal and 
provides points of attachment for the muscles that move the 
appendages. But it also prevents the arthropod from growing, 
unless it occasionally sheds its exoskeleton and produces a 
larger one. This molting process is energetically expensive, 
and it leaves the arthropod vulnerable to predation and other 
dangers until its new, soft exoskeleton hardens.
When the arthropod exoskeleton first evolved in the sea, 
its main functions were probably protection and anchorage 
for muscles, but it later enabled certain arthropods to live 
on land. The exoskeleton’s relative impermeability to 
water helped prevent desiccation, and its strength 
provided support when arthropods left the buoyancy 
of water. Fossil evidence suggests that arthropods 
were among the first animals to colonize land, 
roughly 450 million years ago. These fossils include 
fragments of arthropod remains, as well as possible 
millipede burrows. Arthropod fossils from several 
continents indicate that by 410 million years ago, 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   761 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 763 ===

762 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
by specialized abdominal glands. The silk is spun by organs 
called spinnerets into fibers that then solidify. Each spider 
engineers a web characteristic of its species and builds it per-
fectly on the first try, indicating that this complex behavior 
is inherited. Various spiders also use silk in other ways: as 
droplines for rapid escape, as a cover for eggs, and even as “gift 
wrap” for food that males offer females during courtship. Many 
small spiders also extrude silk into the air and let themselves be 
transported by wind, a behavior known as “ballooning.”
Myriapods
Millipedes and centipedes belong to the clade Myriapoda 
(Figure 33.34). All living myriapods are terrestrial. The 
myriapod head has a pair of antennae and three pairs of 
(centipedes and millipedes); and pancrustaceans (a 
recently defined, diverse group that includes insects as well 
as lobsters, shrimp, barnacles, and other crustaceans).
Chelicerates
Chelicerates (clade Chelicerata) are named for clawlike feed-
ing appendages called chelicerae, which serve as pincers or 
fangs. Chelicerates lack antennae, and most have simple eyes 
(eyes with a single lens).
The earliest chelicerates were eurypterids, or water scor-
pions. These marine and freshwater predators grew up to 3 m 
long; it is thought that some species could have walked on 
land, much as land crabs do today. Most of the marine che-
licerates, including all of the eurypterids, are extinct. Among 
the marine chelicerates that survive today are the sea spiders 
(pycnogonids) and horseshoe crabs (Figure 33.31).
The bulk of modern chelicerates are arachnids, a group 
that includes scorpions, spiders, ticks, and mites (Figure 33.32). 
Nearly all ticks are bloodsucking parasites that live on the body 
surfaces of reptiles or mammals. Parasitic mites live on or in a 
wide variety of vertebrates, invertebrates, and plants.
Arachnids have six pairs of appendages: the chelicerae; a 
pair of appendages called pedipalps that function in sensing, 
feeding, defense, or reproduction; and four pairs of walk-
ing legs. Spiders use their fang-like chelicerae, which are 
equipped with poison glands, to attack prey. As the chelicerae 
pierce the prey, the spider secretes digestive juices onto the 
prey’s torn tissues. The food softens, and the spider sucks up 
the liquid meal. In most spiders, gas exchange is carried out 
by book lungs, stacked platelike structures contained in an 
internal chamber (Figure 33.33). The extensive surface area 
of these respiratory organs enhances the exchange of O2 and 
CO2 between the hemolymph and air.
A unique adaptation of many spiders is the ability to catch 
insects by constructing webs of silk, a liquid protein produced 
. Figure 33.31  Horseshoe crabs (Limulus polyphemus). 
Common on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States, these 
“living fossils” have changed little in hundreds of millions of years. 
They are surviving members of a rich diversity of chelicerates that 
once filled the seas.
50 om
m Dust mites are ubiquitous 
scavengers in human 
dwellings but are harmless 
except to those people who 
are allergic to them 
(colorized SEM).
b Web-building spiders are 
generally most active 
during the daytime.
m Scorpions have pedipalps 
that are pincers special-
    ized for defense and the 
capture of food. The tip 
of the tail bears a 
poisonous stinger.
m Figure 33.32  Arachnids. 
Heart
Book lungs Chelicera Pedipalp
c Figure 33.33   
Book lungs. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   762 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 764 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 763
(a) Millipede
(b) Centipede
m Figure 33.34  Myriapods. 
appendages modified as mouthparts, including the jaw-
like mandibles.
Millipedes have a large number of legs, though fewer than 
the thousand their name implies. Each trunk segment is 
formed from two fused segments and bears two pairs of legs 
(see Figure 33.34a). Millipedes eat decaying leaves and other 
plant matter. They may have been among the earliest animals 
on land, living on mosses and early vascular plants.
Unlike millipedes, centipedes are carnivores. Each segment of 
a centipede’s trunk region has one pair of legs (see Figure 33.34b).  
Centipedes have poison claws on their foremost trunk seg-
ment that paralyze prey and aid in defense.
Pancrustaceans
A series of recent papers present evidence that terrestrial 
insects are more closely related to lobsters and other crusta-
ceans than they are to the terrestrial group we just discussed, 
the myriapods (millipedes and centipedes). These studies 
also suggest that the diverse group of organisms referred to 
as crustaceans are paraphyletic: Some lineages of crustaceans 
are more closely related to insects than they are to other crus-
taceans (Figure 33.35). However, together the insects and 
crustaceans form a clade, which systematists have named 
Pancrustacea (from the Greek pan, all). We turn next to a 
description of the members of Pancrustacea, focusing first on 
crustaceans and then on the insects.
Crustaceans Crustaceans (crabs, lobsters, shrimps, bar-
nacles, and many others) thrive in a broad range of marine, 
freshwater, and terrestrial environments. Many crustaceans 
have highly specialized appendages. Lobsters and crayfishes, 
for instance, have a toolkit of 19 pairs of appendages (see 
Figure 33.30). The anterior-most appendages form two pairs 
of antennae; crustaceans are the only arthropods with two 
pairs. Three or more pairs of appendages are modified as 
mouthparts, including the hard mandibles. Walking legs are 
present on the thorax, and, unlike their terrestrial relatives, 
the insects, crustaceans also have appendages on their post-
genital region, or “tail.”
Chelicerates
Myriapods
Other
crustaceans
Remipedians
(a crustacean group)
Insects
Common ancestor
of arthropods
. Figure 33.35  The phylogenetic position of the insects. 
Recent results have shown that the insects are nested within 
lineages of aquatic crustaceans. The remipedians are 
 one of several groups of aquatic 
 crustaceans that may be the 
 sister group to the insects.
DRAW IT Circle the portions of this tree that comprise 
 t h e  c l a d e  P a n c r u s t a c e a .
Small crustaceans exchange gases across thin areas of the 
cuticle; larger species have gills. Nitrogenous wastes also dif-
fuse through thin areas of the cuticle, but a pair of glands 
regulates the salt balance of the hemolymph.
Sexes are separate in most crustaceans. In the case of 
lobsters and crayfishes, the male uses a specialized pair of 
abdominal appendages to transfer sperm to the reproductive 
pore of the female during copulation. Most aquatic crusta-
ceans go through one or more swimming larval stages.
One of the largest groups of crustaceans (numbering over 
11,000 species) is the isopods, which include terrestrial, fresh-
water, and marine species. Some isopod species are abundant 
in habitats at the bottom of the deep ocean. Among the ter-
restrial isopods are the pill bugs, or wood lice, common on 
the undersides of moist logs and leaves.
Lobsters, crayfishes, crabs, and shrimps are all relatively 
large crustaceans called decapods (Figure 33.36). The cuticle 
of decapods is hardened by calcium carbonate. Most decapod 
species are marine. Crayfishes, however, live in fresh water, 
and some tropical crabs live on land.
. Figure 33.36  A ghost crab, an example of a decapod. Ghost 
crabs live on sandy ocean beaches worldwide. Primarily nocturnal, 
they take shelter in burrows during the day.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   763 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 765 ===

764 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
m Figure 33.37  Krill. These 
planktonic crustaceans are 
consumed in vast quantities by 
some whales.
m Figure 33.38  Barnacles. The 
jointed appendages projecting 
from the barnacles’ shells 
capture organisms and organic 
particles suspended in the water.
Many small crustaceans are important members of marine 
and freshwater plankton communities. Planktonic crusta-
ceans include many species of copepods, which are among 
the most numerous of all animals. Some copepods are graz-
ers that feed upon algae, while others are predators that eat 
small animals (including smaller copepods!). Copepods are 
rivaled in abundance by the shrimplike krill, which grow 
to about 5 cm long (Figure 33.37). A major food source for 
baleen whales (including blue whales, humpbacks, and right 
whales), krill are now being harvested in great numbers by 
humans for food and agricultural fertilizer. The larvae of 
many larger-bodied crustaceans are also planktonic.
With the exception of a few parasitic species, barnacles are 
a group of sessile crustaceans whose cuticle is hardened into 
a shell containing calcium carbonate (Figure 33.38). Most 
barnacles anchor themselves to rocks, boat hulls, pilings, and 
other submerged surfaces. Their natural adhesive is as strong as 
synthetic glues. These barnacles feed by extending appendages 
from their shell to strain food from the water. Barnacles were 
not recognized as crustaceans until the 1800s, when naturalists 
discovered that barnacle larvae resemble the larvae of other 
crustaceans. The remarkable mix of unique traits and crusta-
cean homologies found in barnacles was a major inspiration to 
Charles Darwin as he developed his theory of evolution.
We turn now to a group nested within the paraphyletic 
crustaceans, the insects.
Insects Insects and their six-legged terrestrial relatives form 
an enormous clade, Hexapoda; we’ll focus here on the in-
sects, since as a group they have more described species than 
all other eukaryotic groups combined. Insects live in almost 
every terrestrial habitat and in fresh water, and flying insects 
fill the air. Insects are rare, though not absent, in marine habi-
tats. The internal anatomy of an insect includes several com-
plex organ systems, which are highlighted in Figure 33.39.
The oldest insect fossils date to about 415 million years ago. 
Later, an explosion in insect diversity took place when insect 
flight evolved during the Carboniferous and Permian periods 
(359–252 million years ago). An animal that can fly can escape 
predators, find food and mates, and disperse to new habitats 
more effectively than an animal that must crawl about on the 
Compound eye
Post-genital 
region Thorax Head
Antennae
Dorsal
artery
Ovary Crop
Hemocoel
Vagina
Anus
Cerebral ganglia. The two nerve cords 
meet in the head, where the ganglia 
of several anterior segments are 
fused into a brain (colored white 
below). The antennae, eyes, and 
other sense organs are concentrated 
on the head.
Insect mouthparts are formed from 
several pairs of modified appendages. 
The mouthparts include mandibles, 
which grasshoppers use for chewing. 
In other insects, mouthparts are 
specialized for lapping, piercing, 
or sucking.
Tracheal tubes. Gas exchange in insects is 
accomplished by a tracheal system of branched, 
chitin-lined tubes that infiltrate the body and 
carry oxygen directly to cells. The tracheal 
system opens to the outside of the body 
through spiracles, pores that can control air  
flow and water loss by opening or closing.
Nerve cords. The insect 
nervous system    
consists of a pair of 
ventral nerve cords 
with several 
segmental ganglia.
Heart. The insect heart 
drives hemolymph 
through an open 
circulatory system.
Malpighian tubules. 
Metabolic wastes are 
removed from the 
hemolymph by excretory 
organs called Malpighian 
tubules, which are 
outpocketings of the 
digestive tract.
. Figure 33.39  Anatomy of a grasshopper, an insect. The insect body has three regions: 
head, thorax, and post-genital region. The segmentation of the thorax and post-genital region 
is obvious, but the segments that form the head are fused.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   764 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 766 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 765
diversity of particular insect groups have often been associated 
with radiations of the flowering plants on which they fed.
Many insects undergo metamorphosis during their develop-
ment. In the incomplete metamorphosis of grasshoppers 
and some other insect groups, the young (called nymphs) 
resemble adults but are smaller, have different body propor-
tions, and lack wings. The nymph undergoes a series of molts, 
each time looking more like an adult. With the final molt, the 
insect reaches full size, acquires wings, and becomes sexually 
mature. Insects with complete metamorphosis have larval 
stages specialized for eating and growing that are known by 
such names as caterpillar, maggot, or grub. The larval stage 
looks entirely different from the adult stage, which is specialized 
for dispersal and reproduction. Metamorphosis from the larval 
stage to the adult occurs during a pupal stage (Figure 33.41).
Reproduction in insects is usually sexual, with separate male 
and female individuals. Adults come together and recognize 
each other as members of the same species by advertising with 
bright colors (as in butterflies), sounds (as in crickets), or odors 
(as in moths). Fertilization is generally internal. In most spe-
cies, sperm are deposited directly into the female’s vagina at the 
time of copulation, though in some species the male deposits a 
sperm packet outside the female, and the female picks it up. An 
internal structure in the female called the spermatheca stores 
the sperm, usually enough to fertilize more than one batch of 
eggs. Many insects mate only once in a lifetime. After mating, a 
female often lays her eggs on an appropriate food source where 
the next generation can begin eating as soon as it hatches.
Insects are classified in more than 30 orders, 8 of which are 
introduced in Figure 33.42.
ground. Many insects have 
one or two pairs of wings 
that emerge from the 
dorsal side of the tho-
rax. Because the wings 
are extensions of the cuti-
cle, insects can fly without 
sacrificing any walking legs 
(Figure 33.40). By contrast, 
the flying vertebrates—
birds and bats—have 
one of their two pairs of 
walking legs modified into 
wings, making some of these species clumsy on the ground.
Insects also radiated in response to the origin of new plant 
species, which provided new sources of food. By the speciation 
mechanisms described in Concept 24.2, an insect population 
feeding on a new plant species can diverge from other popu-
lations, eventually forming a new species of insect. A fossil 
record of diverse insect mouthparts, for example, suggests 
that specialized modes of feeding on gymnosperms and other 
Carboniferous plants contributed to early adaptive radiations 
of insects. Later, a major increase in insect diversity appears 
to have been stimulated by the evolutionary expansion of 
flowering plants during the mid-Cretaceous period (about 
100 million years ago). Although insect and plant diversity 
decreased during the Cretaceous mass extinction, both groups 
have rebounded over the past 66 million years. Increases in the 
m Figure 33.40  Ladybird 
beetle in flight. 
 Mastering Biology Video: Butterfly Emerging
(a) Larva (caterpillar) (b) Pupa 
(c) Later-stage pupa 
(d) Emerging adult 
(e) Adult 
m Figure 33.41  Complete metamorphosis of a butterfly. (a) The larva (caterpillar) spends 
its time eating and growing, molting as it grows. (b) After several molts, the larva develops into a 
pupa. (c) Within the pupa, the larval tissues are broken down, and the adult is built by the division 
and differentiation of cells that were quiescent in the larva. (d) Eventually, the adult begins to 
emerge from the pupal cuticle. (e) Hemolymph is pumped into veins of the wings and then 
withdrawn, leaving the hardened veins as struts supporting the wings. The insect will fly off and 
reproduce, deriving much of its nourishment from the food reserves stored by the feeding larva.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   765 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 767 ===

766 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
. Figure 33.42  Exploring Insect Diversity
Although there are more than 30 orders of insects, we’ll focus on just 8 here. Two orders of 
wingless insects, the bristletails (Archaeognatha) and silverfish (Zygentoma), diverged from 
other insects early in insect evolution. Evolutionary relationships among the other groups 
discussed here are under debate and so are not depicted on the tree.
These small, wingless insects have a flattened body and reduced eyes. They live in leaf 
litter or under bark. They can also infest buildings, where they can become pests.
Proboscis
Complete metamorphosis
Coleoptera (beetles; 350,000 species)
Diptera (151,000 species)
Hymenoptera (125,000 species)
Lepidoptera (120,000 species)
Incomplete metamorphosis
Hemiptera (85,000 species)
Orthoptera (13,000 species)
Archaeognatha (bristletails; 350 species)
Zygentoma (silverfish; 450 species)
Winged insects (many orders; six are shown below) 
These wingless insects are found under bark and in other moist, dark habitats such as 
leaf litter, compost piles, and rock crevices. They feed on algae, plant debris, and lichens. 
Beetles, such as this weevil in the genus Rhinastus, 
constitute the most species-rich order of insects. 
They have two pairs of wings, one of which is 
thick and stiff, the other membranous. They 
have an armored exoskeleton and mouthparts 
adapted for biting and chewing. 
Hemipterans include 
so-called “true bugs,” 
such as stink bugs, 
bed bugs, and 
assassin bugs. 
(Insects in 
other orders 
are sometimes 
erroneously 
called bugs.) 
Hemipterans have 
two pairs of wings, 
one pair partly leathery, the other pair 
membranous. They have piercing or suck-
ing mouthparts and undergo incomplete 
metamorphosis, as shown in this image of 
an adult stink bug guarding its offspring 
(nymphs).
Dipterans have one pair of wings; the second pair 
has become modified into balancing organs called 
halteres. Their mouthparts are adapted for sucking, 
piercing, or lapping. Flies and mosquitoes are among 
the best-known dipterans, which live as scavengers, 
predators, and parasites. Like many other insects, 
flies such as this red tachinid (Adejeania vexatrix) have 
well-developed compound eyes that provide a wide-
angle view and excel at detecting fast movements. 
Grasshoppers, crickets, and their relatives are 
mostly herbivorous. They have large hind 
legs adapted for jumping, two pairs of wings 
(one leathery, one membranous), and biting 
or chewing mouthparts. This aptly named spiny 
devil katydid (Panacanthus cuspidatus) has a 
face and legs specialized for making a threat-
ening display. Male orthopterans commonly 
make courtship sounds by rubbing together 
body parts, such as ridges on their hind legs. 
Butterflies and moths have two pairs of wings 
covered with tiny scales. To feed, they uncoil 
a long proboscis, visible in this photograph 
of a hummingbird hawkmoth (Macroglossum 
stellatarum). This moth’s name refers to its 
ability to hover in the air while feeding from a 
flower. Most lepidopterans feed on nectar, but 
some species feed on other substances, includ-
ing animal blood or tears. 
Most hymenopterans, which include ants, bees, 
and wasps, are highly social insects. They have 
two pairs of membranous wings, a mobile 
head, and chewing or sucking mouthparts. The 
females of many species have a posterior sting-
ing organ. Many species, such as this European 
paper wasp (Polistes dominulus), build elaborate 
nests.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   766 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 768 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 767
Animals as numerous, diverse, and widespread as insects 
are bound to affect the lives of most other terrestrial organ-
isms, including humans. Insects consume enormous quanti-
ties of plant matter; play key roles as predators, parasites, and 
decomposers; and are an essential source of food for larger 
animals such as lizards, rodents, and birds. Humans depend 
on bees, flies, and many other insects to pollinate crops and 
orchards. In addition, people in many parts of the world 
eat insects as an important source of protein. On the other 
hand, insects are carriers for many diseases, including African 
sleeping sickness (spread by tsetse flies that carry the protist 
Trypanosoma; see Figure 28.9) and malaria (spread by mosqui-
toes that carry the protist Plasmodium; see Figure 23.18 and 
Figure 28.18).
Insects also compete with humans for food. In parts of 
Africa, for instance, insects claim about 75% of the crops. 
In the United States, billions of dollars are spent each year 
on pesticides. But insect populations often evolve pesticide 
resistance after short periods of time. Try as we may, not even 
humans have challenged the preeminence of insects and 
their arthropod kin. As one prominent entomologist put it: 
“Bugs are not going to inherit the Earth. They own it now. So 
we might as well make peace with the landlord.”
CONCEPT CHECK 33.4
1. How do nematode and annelid body plans differ?
2. How have modifications in the feeding appendages of 
arthropods helped them thrive successfully on Earth?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Historically, annelids and arthro-
pods were viewed as closely related because both have body 
segmentation. Yet DNA sequence data indicate that anne-
lids belong to one clade (Lophotrochozoa) and arthropods 
to another (Ecdysozoa). Could traditional and molecular 
hypotheses be tested by studying the Hox genes that control 
body segmentation (see Concept 20.6)? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 33.5 
Echinoderms and chordates  
are deuterostomes
Sea stars, sea urchins, and 
other echinoderms (phylum 
Echinodermata) may seem to 
have little in common with 
vertebrates (animals that 
have a backbone) and other members of phylum Chordata. 
Nevertheless, DNA evidence indicates that echinoderms  
and chordates are closely related, with both phyla 
belonging to the Deuterostomia clade of bilaterian animals. 
Echinoderms and chordates also share features characteristic 
of a deuterostome mode of development, such as radial cleav-
age and formation of the anus from the blastopore (see  
Figure 32.10). As discussed in Concept 32.4, however, some 
Porifera
Cnidaria
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomia
animal phyla with members that have deuterostome devel-
opmental features, including ectoprocts and brachiopods, are 
not in the deuterostome clade. Hence, despite its name, the 
clade Deuterostomia is defined primarily by DNA similarities, 
not developmental similarities.
Echinoderms
Sea stars (commonly called starfish) and most other groups of 
echinoderms (from the Greek echin, spiny, and derma, skin) 
are slow-moving or sessile marine animals. Echinoderms have 
a coelom. A thin epidermis covers an endoskeleton of hard 
calcareous plates, and most species are prickly from skeletal 
bumps and spines. Unique to echinoderms is the water 
vascular system, a network of hydraulic canals branching 
into extensions called tube feet that function in locomotion 
and feeding (Figure 33.43). Sexual reproduction of echino-
derms usually involves separate male and female individuals 
that release their gametes into the water.
Echinoderms descended from bilaterally symmetrical 
ancestors, yet on first inspection most species seem to have 
a radially symmetrical form. The internal and external parts 
of most adult echinoderms radiate from the center, often as 
five spokes. However, echinoderm larvae have bilateral sym-
metry. Furthermore, the symmetry of adult echinoderms is 
not truly radial. For example, the opening (madreporite) of 
a sea star’s water vascular system is not central but shifted to 
one side.
Living echinoderms are divided into five clades.
Asteroidea: Sea Stars and Sea Daisies
Sea stars have arms radiating from a central disk; the under-
surfaces of the arms bear tube feet. By a combination of 
muscular and chemical actions, the tube feet can attach to or 
detach from a substrate. The sea star adheres firmly to rocks 
or creeps along slowly as its tube feet extend, grip, release, 
extend, and grip again. Although the base of the tube foot 
has a flattened disk that resembles a suction cup, the grip-
ping action results from adhesive chemicals, not suction (see 
Figure 33.43).
Sea stars also use their tube feet to grasp prey, such as 
clams and oysters. The arms of the sea star embrace the closed 
bivalve, clinging tightly with their tube feet. The sea star then 
turns part of its stomach inside out, everting it through its 
mouth and into the narrow opening between the halves of 
the bivalve’s shell. Next, the digestive system of the sea star 
secretes juices that begin digesting the mollusc within its 
own shell. The sea star then brings its stomach back inside 
its body, where digestion of the mollusc’s (now liquefied) 
body is completed. The ability to begin the digestive process 
outside of its body allows a sea star to consume bivalves and 
other prey species that are much larger than its mouth.
Sea stars and some other echinoderms have considerable 
powers of regeneration. Sea stars can regrow lost arms, and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   767 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 769 ===

768 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
 Mastering Biology Video: Echinoderm Tube Feet
StomachAnus
Ring
canal
Tube
feet
Ampulla
Radial
nerve
Spine
Gills
Gonads
Podium
A short digestive tract 
runs from the mouth 
on the bottom of the 
central disk to the 
anus on top of the disk.
The surface of a sea star is 
covered by spines that help 
defend against predators, as 
well as by small gills that 
provide gas exchange.
Each tube foot consists of a bulb-like ampulla and a podium (foot 
portion). When the ampulla squeezes, water is forced into the podium, 
which expands and contacts the substrate. Adhesive chemicals are then 
secreted from the base of the podium, attaching it to the substrate. To 
detach the tube foot, de-adhesive chemicals are secreted and muscles 
in the podium contract, forcing water back into the ampulla and 
shortening the podium. As it moves, a sea star leaves an observable 
“footprint” of adhesive material on the substrate.
Radial canal. The water vascular system consists of a 
ring canal in the central disk and five radial canals, each 
running in a groove down the entire length of an arm. 
Branching from each radial canal are hundreds of 
hollow, muscular tube feet filled with fluid. 
Digestive glands secrete 
digestive juices and aid in the 
absorption and storage
of nutrients.
Madreporite. Water 
can flow in or out 
of the water vascular 
system into the 
surrounding water 
through the 
madreporite.
Central disk. The central disk 
has a nerve ring and nerve 
cords radiating from the ring 
into the arms.
m Figure 33.43  Anatomy of a sea star, an echinoderm  
(top view). In the diagram, the digestive glands, radial canal,  
and gonads are illustrated in separate arms for clarity, but each is present in every arm.  
 The photograph shows a sea star surrounded by sea urchins, which are also echinoderms.
members of one genus can even regrow an entire body from a 
single arm if part of the central disk remains attached.
The clade Asteroidea, to which sea stars belong, also 
includes a small group of armless species, the sea daisies. Only 
three species of sea daisies are known, all of which live on 
submerged wood. A sea daisy’s body is typically disk-shaped; 
it has a five-sided organization and measures less than a cen-
timeter in diameter (Figure 33.44). The edge of the body is 
ringed with small spines. Sea daisies absorb nutrients through 
a membrane that surrounds their body.
Ophiuroidea: Brittle Stars
Brittle stars have a distinct central disk and long, flexible 
arms (Figure 33.45). They move primarily by lashing their 
arms in serpentine movements. The base of a brittle star 
tube foot lacks the flattened disk found in sea stars but does 
secrete adhesive chemicals. Hence, like sea stars and other 
c Figure 33.44  A sea 
daisy (clade Asteroidea). 
. Figure 33.45  A brittle star (clade Ophiuroidea). 
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   768 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 770 ===

 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 769
morphology has changed little over the course of evolution; 
fossilized sea lilies some 500 million years old are extremely 
similar to present-day members of the clade.
Holothuroidea: Sea Cucumbers
On casual inspection, sea cucumbers do not look much 
like other echinoderms. They lack spines, and their endo-
skeleton is much reduced. They are also elongated in their 
oral-aboral axis, giving them the shape for which they are 
named and further disguising their relationship to sea stars 
and sea urchins (Figure 33.48). Closer examination, how-
ever, reveals that sea cucumbers have five radially arranged 
sections of tube feet, as in other echinoderms. Some of 
the tube feet around the mouth are developed as feeding 
tentacles.
Chordates
Phylum Chordata consists of two basal groups of inverte-
brates, the lancelets and the tunicates, as well as the verte-
brates. Chordates are bilaterally symmetrical animals with 
a coelom and segmented bodies. The close relationship 
between echinoderms and chordates does not mean that 
one phylum evolved from the other. In fact, echinoderms 
and chordates have evolved independently of one another 
for over 500 million years. We will trace the phylogeny 
of chordates in Chapter 34, focusing on the history of 
vertebrates.
echinoderms, brittle stars can use their tube feet to grip 
substrates. Some species are suspension feeders; others are 
predators or scavengers.
Echinoidea: Sea Urchins and Sand Dollars
Sea urchins and sand dollars have no arms, but they do have 
five radially arranged groups of tube feet that function in 
slow movement. Sea urchins also have muscles that pivot 
their long spines, which aid in locomotion as well as pro-
tection (Figure 33.46). A sea urchin’s mouth, located on its 
underside, is ringed by highly complex, jaw-like structures 
that are well adapted to eating seaweed. Sea urchins are 
roughly spherical, whereas sand dollars are flat disks.
Crinoidea: Sea Lilies and Feather Stars
Sea lilies live attached to the substrate by a stalk; feather 
stars crawl about by using their long, flexible arms. Both 
use their arms in suspension feeding. The arms encircle 
the mouth, which is directed upward, away from the sub-
strate (Figure 33.47). Crinoidea is an ancient group whose 
. Figure 33.48  A sea cucumber (clade Holothuroidea). 
. Figure 33.46  A sea urchin (clade Echinoidea). 
. Figure 33.47  A feather star (clade Crinoidea). 
CONCEPT CHECK 33.5
1. How does a sea star feed on prey larger than its mouth?
2. WHAT IF? The insect Drosophila melanogaster and the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans are prominent model 
organisms. Are these species the most appropriate inver-
tebrates for making inferences about humans and other 
vertebrates? Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Describe how the features and diver-
sity of echinoderms illustrate the unity of life, the diversity 
of life, and the match between organisms and their environ-
ments (see Concept 21.2).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   769 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 771 ===

This table recaps the animal groups surveyed in this chapter.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
33 Chapter Review 
Key Concept Phylum Description
CONCEPT 33.1 
Sponges are basal animals  
that lack tissues (pp. 744–745)
? Lacking tissues and organs, how do  
sponges accomplish tasks such as gas  
exchange, nutrient transport, and  
waste disposal?
Porifera 
(sponges)
   Lack tissues; have choanocytes 
(collar cells—flagellated cells that 
ingest bacteria and tiny food 
particles)
CONCEPT 33.2 
Cnidarians are an ancient  
phylum of eumetazoans  
(pp. 745–747)
? Describe the cnidarian body plan  
and its two major variations.
Cnidaria (hydras, 
jellies, sea anem-
ones, corals)
   U n i q u e  s t i n g i n g  s t r u c t u r e s  ( n e m a-
tocysts) housed in specialized cells 
(cnidocytes); diploblastic; radially 
symmetrical; gastrovascular cavity 
(digestive compartment with a single 
opening)
CONCEPT 33.3 
Lophotrochozoans, a clade  
identified by molecular data,  
have the widest range of  
animal body forms (pp. 748–759)
? Is the lophotrochozoan clade united by  
unique morphological features shared  
by all of its members? Explain.
Platyhelminthes 
(flatworms)
  No body cavity; dorsoventrally 
flattened; gastrovascular cavity or 
no digestive tract
Syndermata (roti-
fers and acantho-
cephalans)
  Hemocoel; rotifers have alimentary 
canal (digestive tube with mouth 
and anus) and jaws (trophi); acantho-
cephalans are parasites of vertebrates
Ectoprocta and 
Brachiopoda
  Coelom; have lophophores (feeding  
structures bearing ciliated tentacles)
Mollusca (clams, 
snails, squids)
 Hemocoel; reduced coelom; three  
 main body parts (muscular foot,  
 visceral mass, mantle); most have hard  
 shell made of calcium carbonate
Annelida  
(segmented 
worms)
  Coelom; body wall and internal 
organs are segmented (except 
digestive tract, which is unsegmented)
CONCEPT 33.4 
Ecdysozoans are the most  
species-rich animal  
group (pp. 759–767)
? Describe some ecological roles  
of nematodes and arthropods.
Nematoda 
(roundworms)
   Hemocoel; cylindrical body with 
tapered ends; no circulatory system; 
undergo ecdysis
Arthropoda (spi-
ders, centipedes, 
crustaceans, and 
insects)
   Hemocoel; reduced coelom. 
Have segmented body, jointed 
appendages, and exoskeleton made 
of protein and chitin
CONCEPT 33.5 
Echinoderms and chordates  
are deuterostomes (pp. 767–769)
? You’ve read that echinoderms and  
chordates are closely related and have  
evolved independently for over 500 million  
years. Explain how both of these statements  
can be correct.
Echinodermata 
(sea stars, sea 
urchins)
   Coelom; bilaterally symmetrical 
larvae and five-part body organiza-
tion as adults; unique water vascular 
system; endoskeleton
Chordata (lance-
lets, tunicates, 
vertebrates)
  Coelom; have notochord; dorsal, 
hollow nerve cord; pharyngeal slits; 
post-anal tail (see Figure 34.3)
Metazoa
Eumetazoa
Bilateria
Deuterostomia Ecdysozoa Lophotrochozoa
770 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   770 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 772 ===

9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Write a short 
essay (100–150 words) that explains how the respiratory organs 
in different invertebrate groups have diversified based on their 
habitats and complexity of body structures.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Collectively, do these beetles and all other invertebrate 
species combined form a monophyletic group? Explain your 
answer and provide an overview of the evolutionary history of 
invertebrate life.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 CHAPTER 33   Invertebrates 771
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–6 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION • INTERPRET THE DATA Based on  
Figure 32.1 1, draw a phylogenetic tree of Bilateria that includes 
the ten phyla of bilaterians discussed in detail in this chapter. 
Label each branch that leads to a phylum with a C, H, HC, or N, 
depending on whether members of the phylum have a coelom 
only (C), hemocoel only (H), hemocoel and reduced coelom 
(HC), or no body cavity (N). Use your labeled tree to answer 
the following questions. (a) For each of the three major clades of 
bilaterians, what (if anything) can be inferred about whether the 
common ancestor of the clade had a coelom? (b) T o what extent 
has the presence of a coelom in animals changed over the course 
of evolution?
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Bats emit ultrasonic sounds and then 
use the returning echoes of those sounds to locate and capture 
flying insects, such as moths, in the dark. In response to bat 
attacks, some tiger moths make ultrasonic clicks of their own. 
Researchers hypothesize that tiger moth clicks likely either 
(1) jam the bat’s sonar or (2) warn the bat about the moth’s 
toxic chemical defenses. The graph below shows two patterns 
observed in studies of moth capture rates over time.
100
75
50
25
0
1234567
Time (nights)
Moth capture 
rate (%)
Tiger moth species A
Tiger moth species B
Bats in these experiments were “naive,” meaning that prior 
to the study the bats had not previously hunted tiger moths. 
Indicate whether the results support hypothesis (1), hypothesis 
(2), or both. Explain why the researchers used naive bats in this 
study.
URRY1637_12_GE_C33_PRF.indd   771 3/14/20   3:40 AM

=== SIDE 773 ===

Figure 34.1 S m a l l  a n d  s l e n d e r ,  t h i s  i n c o n s p i c u o u s  s p e c i e s  (Myllokunmingia fengjiaoa) 
lived in the ocean 530 million years ago, along with an immense variety of dangerous 
and well-defended invertebrate animals. Although lacking claws or armor, this 
ancient species was closely related to one of the most successful groups of animals  
on Earth: the vertebrates, animals with a backbone.
Vertebrates34
Hagfishes and lampreys
Sharks, rays, 
chimaeras
Ray-finned fishes
Coelacanths
Lungfishes
Amphibians
Common
ancestor of
vertebrates
Skull and
backbone
composed of
vertebrae:
found in all
vertebrates
Jaws and a 
mineralized
(bony) skeleton: 
enabled vertebrates to 
become dominant predators
Lobed fins: 
muscular fins with 
rod-shaped bones
Limbs with digits:
evolved from lobed fins;
a key development in
colonization of land
Amniotic egg:
protects embryo, enables reproduction 
in terrestrial (land) environments
Reptiles and
mammals
What are some key characteristics that have appeared 
during vertebrate evolution?
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 34
• Video: Sea Horse Camouflage
• HHMI Video: Great Transitions: The 
Origins of Humans
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Chordates
• Problem-Solving Exercise: Declining 
Amphibian Populations
Study Tip
Make a table: Humans are mammals—and 
we are also amniotes, tetrapods, lobe-fins, 
osteichthyans, gnathostomes, vertebrates, 
and chordates (see Figure 34.2). As you 
read the chapter, list derived characters for 
these clades and describe whether these 
traits have been retained, modified, or lost 
in the human lineage.
34.1 Chordates have a notochord and  
a dorsal, hollow nerve cord  p. 773
34.2 Vertebrates are chordates that have 
a backbone  p. 776
34.3 Gnathostomes are vertebrates that 
have jaws  p. 779
34.4 Tetrapods are gnathostomes that 
have limbs  p. 784
34.5 Amniotes are tetrapods that have  
a terrestrially adapted egg  p. 788
34.6 Mammals are amniotes that have 
hair and produce milk  p. 795
34.7 Humans are mammals that 
have a large brain and bipedal 
locomotion  p. 802
KEY CONCEPTS
Clade Derived
characters
Found in humans?
Chordates Notochord
Post-anal tail
Modiﬁed
(gelatinous disks
between vertebrae)
Lost
772
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   772 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 774 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 773
There are more than 60,000 species of vertebrates, ani-
mals with a backbone. This is a relatively small number 
compared to, say, the 1 million insect species on Earth. 
But what vertebrates lack in number of species, they make 
up for in disparity, varying enormously in characteristics 
such as body mass. Vertebrates include the heaviest ani -
mals ever to walk on land, plant-eating dinosaurs that 
were as massive as 40,000 kg (heavier than 13 pickup 
trucks). The biggest animal ever to exist on Earth is also a 
vertebrate—the blue whale, which can exceed 100,000 kg. 
On the other end of the spectrum, the fish Schindleria 
brevipinguis is just 8.4 mm long and has a mass roughly 
100 billion times smaller than that of a blue whale.
In this chapter, we will track the origin and evolution of 
the vertebrate body plan, from a notochord to a head to a 
mineralized skeleton to limbs with digits (such as toes). We’ll 
also explore the major groups of vertebrates (both living 
and extinct), as well as the evolutionary history of our own 
species—Homo sapiens.
CONCEPT 34.1
Chordates have a notochord  
and a dorsal, hollow nerve cord
Vertebrates are members of the phylum Chordata, the chor-
dates. Chordates are bilaterian (bilaterally symmetrical) 
animals, and within Bilateria, they belong to the clade of ani-
mals known as Deuterostomia (see Figure 32.11). As shown 
in Figure 34.2, there are two groups of invertebrate deutero-
stomes that are more closely related to vertebrates than they 
are to other invertebrates: the cephalochordates and the uro-
chordates. Thus, along with the vertebrates, these two inver-
tebrate groups are classified within the chordates.
Derived Characters of Chordates
All chordates share a set of derived characters, though many 
species possess some of these traits only during embryonic 
ANCESTRAL 
DEUTEROSTOME
Echinodermata 
(sister group to chordates)
Urochordata
(tunicates)
Cephalochordata
(lancelets)
Myxini
(hagfishes)
Petromyzontida
(lampreys)
Chondrichthyes
(sharks, rays, 
 chimaeras)
Actinopterygii
(ray-finned fishes)
Actinistia
(coelacanths)
Dipnoi
(lungfishes)
Amphibia (frogs, 
salamanders)
Reptilia
(turtles, snakes,
crocodiles, birds)
Mammalia
(mammals)
Common
ancestor of
chordates
Vertebrae
Notochord
Jaws, mineralized skeleton
Lungs or lung derivatives
Lobed fins
Limbs with digits
Amniotic egg
Milk
Chordates
Vertebrates
Cyclostomes Gnathostomes
Osteichthyans
Lobe-fins
T etrapods
Amniotes
c Figure 34.2 Phylogeny of  
living chordates. This phylogenetic 
 hypothesis shows the major clades of chordates 
 in relation to the other main deuterostome clade, 
 Echinodermata (see Concept 33.5). Derived characters 
 are listed for selected clades; for example, only gnathostomes 
 have a jaw. In some lineages, derived traits have been lost 
over time or occur in reduced form; hagfishes and lampreys, 
for example, are vertebrates with reduced vertebrae.
DRAW IT Label the branch point representing the common  
ancestor of vertebrates “1” and the branch point representing the  
common ancestor of tetrapods “2.” Redraw the vertebrate portion of this 
tree by rotating its branches around these two branch points. Use the 
redrawn tree to explain why it is not correct to represent evolution as a 
sequence of events “leading to” humans and other mammals.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   773 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 775 ===

774 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Pharyngeal slits function as suspension-feeding devices in 
many invertebrate chordates. In vertebrates (with the excep-
tion of vertebrates with limbs, the tetrapods), these slits and 
the pharyngeal arches that support them have been modified 
for gas exchange and are called gills. In tetrapods, the pharyn-
geal clefts do not develop into slits. Instead, the pharyngeal 
arches that surround the clefts develop into parts of the ear 
and other structures in the head and neck.
Muscular, Post-Anal Tail
Chordates have a tail that extends posterior to the anus, 
although in many species it is greatly reduced during embry-
onic development. In contrast, most nonchordates have a 
digestive tract that extends nearly the whole length of the 
body. The chordate tail contains skeletal elements and mus-
cles, and it helps propel many aquatic species in the water.
Lancelets
The sister group to all other 
living chordates is the group 
of animals called lancelets 
(Cephalochordata), 
which get their name 
from their bladelike shape 
(Figure 34.4). As larvae, 
lancelets develop a noto-
chord; a dorsal, hollow 
nerve cord; numerous pha-
ryngeal slits; and a post-anal tail. The larvae feed on plankton in 
the water column, alternating between upward swimming and 
passive sinking. As the larvae sink, they trap plankton and other 
suspended particles in their pharynx.
Adult lancelets can reach 6 cm in length. They retain key 
chordate traits, closely resembling the generalized chordate 
shown in Figure 34.3. Following metamorphosis, an adult 
lancelet swims down to the seafloor and wriggles backward 
into the sand, leaving only its anterior end exposed. Cilia draw 
seawater into the lancelet’s mouth. A net of mucus secreted 
across the pharyngeal slits removes tiny food particles as the 
water passes through the slits, and the trapped food enters 
the intestine. The pharynx and pharyngeal slits play a minor 
role in gas exchange, which occurs mainly across the external 
body surface.
A lancelet frequently leaves its burrow to swim to a new loca-
tion. Though feeble swimmers, these invertebrate chordates 
display, in a simple form, the swimming mechanism of fishes. 
Coordinated contraction of muscles arranged like rows of chev-
rons 177772 along the sides of the notochord flexes the noto-
chord, producing side-to-side undulations that thrust the body 
forward. This serial arrangement of muscles is evidence of the 
lancelet’s segmentation. The muscle segments develop from 
blocks of mesoderm called somites, which are found along each 
side of the notochord in all chordate embryos.
development. Figure 34.3 illustrates four key characters of 
chordates: a notochord; a dorsal, hollow nerve cord; pha-
ryngeal slits or clefts; and a muscular, post-anal tail.
Notochord
Chordates are named for a skeletal structure, the notochord, 
present in all chordate embryos as well as in some adult chor-
dates. The notochord is a longitudinal, flexible rod located 
between the digestive tube and the nerve cord. It is composed of 
large, fluid-filled cells encased in fairly stiff, fibrous tissue. The 
notochord provides skeletal support throughout most of the 
length of a chordate, and in larvae or adults that retain it, it also 
provides a firm but flexible structure against which muscles can 
work during swimming. In most vertebrates, a more complex, 
jointed skeleton develops around the ancestral notochord, and 
the adult retains only remnants of the embryonic notochord. 
In humans, for example, the notochord is reduced and forms 
part of the gelatinous disks sandwiched between the vertebrae.
Dorsal, Hollow Nerve Cord
The nerve cord of a chordate embryo develops from a plate 
of ectoderm that rolls into a neural tube located dorsal to the 
notochord. The resulting dorsal, hollow nerve cord is unique 
to chordates. Other animal phyla have solid nerve cords, and 
in most cases they are ventrally located. The nerve cord of a 
chordate embryo develops into the central nervous system: 
the brain and spinal cord.
Pharyngeal Slits or Clefts
The digestive tube of chordates extends from the mouth to 
the anus. The region just posterior to the mouth is the phar-
ynx. In all chordate embryos, a series of arches separated 
by grooves forms along the outer surface of the pharynx. 
In most chordates, these grooves (known as pharyngeal 
clefts) develop into slits that open into the pharynx. These 
pharyngeal slits allow water entering the mouth to exit 
the body without passing through the entire digestive tract. 
Muscle 
segments
Mouth
Anus
Notochord
Post-anal tail Pharyngeal slits or clefts
Dorsal, hollow nerve cord
. Figure 34.3 Chordate characteristics. All chordates possess 
the four highlighted structural trademarks at some point during 
their development.
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   774 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 776 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 775
1 cm
Segmental
muscles
Cirri
Mouth
Atrium
Digestive tract
Atriopore
Anus
Pharyngeal slits
Tail
Dorsal, hollow
nerve cord
Notochord
. Figure 34.4 The lancelet Branchiostoma, a cephalochordate. 
This small invertebrate displays all four main chordate characters. 
Water enters the mouth and passes through the pharyngeal 
slits into the atrium, a chamber that vents to the outside via the 
atriopore; large particles are blocked from entering the mouth by 
tentacle-like cirri. The serially arranged segmental muscles produce 
the lancelet’s wavelike swimming movements.
Incurrent
siphon
to mouth
Excurrent
siphon
Pharynx
with
numerous
slits
Atrium
Intestine
Esophagus
Stomach
Anus
Excurrent
siphon
Water flow
Atrium
Stomach
Intestine
Muscle
segments
Notochord
Dorsal, hollow
nerve cord
Tail
Tunic
Pharynx with slits
(c)An adult tunicate, or sea squirt, is a 
sessile animal (photo is approximately 
life-sized).
(b) In the adult, prominent pharyngeal slits 
function in suspension feeding, but other 
chordate characters are not obvious.
(a)A tunicate larva is a free-swimming but 
nonfeeding “tadpole” in which all four 
main characters of chordates are evident.
Incurrent
siphon
Excurrent
siphon
. Figure 34.5 A tunicate, a urochordate.
Globally, lancelets are rare, but in a few areas (such as 
Tampa Bay, on the Florida coast), they may reach densities of 
more than 5,000 individuals per square meter.
Tunicates
Recent molecular stud-
ies indicate that the 
tunicates (Urochordata) 
are more closely related to 
other chordates than are 
lancelets. The chordate 
characters of tunicates are 
most apparent during their 
larval stage, which may be 
as brief as a few minutes 
(Figure 34.5a). In many species, the larva uses its tail muscles 
and notochord to swim through water in search of a suitable 
substrate on which it can settle, guided by cues it receives from 
light- and gravity-sensitive cells.
Once a tunicate has settled on a substrate, it undergoes a 
radical metamorphosis in which many of its chordate charac-
ters disappear. Its tail and notochord are resorbed; its nervous 
system degenerates; and its remaining organs rotate 90°. As an 
adult, a tunicate draws in water through an incurrent siphon; 
the water then passes through the pharyngeal slits into a cham-
ber called the atrium and exits through an excurrent siphon 
(Figure 34.5b and c). Food particles are filtered from the water 
by a mucous net and transported by cilia to the esophagus. The 
anus empties into the excurrent siphon. Some tunicate spe-
cies shoot a jet of water through their excurrent siphon when 
attacked, earning them the informal name of “sea squirts.”
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   775 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 777 ===

776 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
suggested that ancestral chordates had genes associated with 
vertebrate organs such as the heart and thyroid gland. These 
genes are found in tunicates and vertebrates but are absent 
from nonchordate invertebrates. Another recent study found 
that tunicates (but not lancelets) have embryonic cells that 
have some of the characteristics of the neural crest, a derived 
trait found in all vertebrates (see Figure 34.7). This suggests 
that embryonic cells similar to those in tunicates may repre-
sent an intermediate cell population from which the verte-
brate neural crest evolved.
The loss of chordate characters in the adult stage of tuni-
cates appears to have occurred after the tunicate lineage 
branched off from other chordates. Even the tunicate larva 
appears to be highly derived. For example, tunicates have 
nine Hox genes, whereas all other chordates studied to date—
including the early-diverging lancelets—share a set of 13 Hox 
genes. The apparent loss of four Hox genes indicates that the 
chordate body plan of a tunicate larva is built using a differ-
ent set of genetic controls than other chordates.
Early Chordate Evolution
Although lancelets and tunicates are relatively obscure ani-
mals, they occupy key positions in the history of life and can 
provide clues about the evolutionary origin of vertebrates. 
For example, as you have read, lancelets display key chordate 
characters as adults, and their lineage branches from the base 
of the chordate phylogenetic tree. These findings suggest 
that the ancestral chordate may have looked something like 
a lancelet—that is, it had an anterior end with a mouth; a 
notochord; a dorsal, hollow nerve cord; pharyngeal slits; and 
a post-anal tail.
Research on lancelets has also revealed important clues 
about the evolution of the chordate brain. Rather than a full-
fledged brain, lancelets have only a slightly swollen tip on the 
anterior end of their dorsal nerve cord (Figure 34.6). But the 
same Hox genes that organize major regions of the forebrain, 
midbrain, and hindbrain of vertebrates express themselves 
in a corresponding pattern in this small cluster of cells in the 
lancelet’s nerve cord. This suggests that the vertebrate brain 
is an elaboration of an ancestral structure similar to the lance-
let’s simple nerve cord tip.
As for tunicates, several of their genomes have been com-
pletely sequenced and can be used to identify genes likely 
to have been present in early chordates. Researchers have 
BF1
Nerve cord of lancelet embryo
Brain of vertebrate embryo 
(shown straightened)
Forebrain
BF1
Otx
Otx
Hox3
Hox3
HindbrainMidbrain
. Figure 34.6 Expression of developmental genes in lancelets 
and vertebrates. Hox genes (including BF1, Otx, and Hox3) control 
the development of major regions of the vertebrate brain. These 
genes are expressed in the same anterior-to-posterior order in 
lancelets and vertebrates. Each colored bar is positioned above the 
portion of the brain whose development that gene controls.
MAKE CONNECTIONS What do these expression patterns and those 
in Figure 20.19 indicate about Hox genes and their evolution?
CONCEPT CHECK 34.1
1. Identify the four derived characters that all chordates have 
at some point during their life.
2. You are a chordate, yet you lack most of the main derived 
characters of chordates. Explain.
3. VISUAL SKILLS Based on the phylogenetic tree in Figure 34.2, 
predict which vertebrate groups should have lungs or lung 
derivatives. Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 34.2
Vertebrates are chordates  
that have a backbone
During the Cambrian period, half a billion years ago, a lin-
eage of chordates gave rise to vertebrates. With a skeletal 
system and a more complex nervous system than that of their 
ancestors, vertebrates became more efficient at two essential 
tasks: capturing food and avoiding being eaten.
Derived Characters of Vertebrates
Living vertebrates share a set of derived characters that distin-
guish them from other chordates. For example, as a result of 
gene duplication, vertebrates possess two or more sets of Hox 
genes (lancelets and tunicates have only one). Other impor-
tant families of genes that produce transcription factors and 
signaling molecules are also duplicated in vertebrates. The 
resulting additional genetic complexity may be associated 
with innovations in the vertebrate nervous system and skel-
eton, including the development of a skull and a backbone 
composed of vertebrae. In some vertebrates, the vertebrae 
are little more than small prongs of cartilage arrayed dorsally 
along the notochord. In the majority of vertebrates, however, 
the vertebrae enclose the spinal cord and have taken over the 
mechanical roles of the notochord.
Another feature unique to vertebrates is the neural crest, 
a collection of cells that appears along the edges of the clos-
ing neural tube of an embryo (Figure 34.7). Neural crest cells 
disperse throughout the embryo, where they give rise to a 
variety of structures, including teeth, some of the bones and 
cartilage of the skull, several types of neurons, and the sen-
sory capsules in which eyes and other sense organs develop.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   776 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 778 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 777
force against their notochord, which they retain in adulthood 
as a strong, flexible rod of cartilage. Hagfishes have a small 
brain, eyes, ears, and a nasal opening that connects with the 
pharynx. Their mouths contain tooth-like formations made of 
the protein keratin.
All of the 30 living species of hagfishes are marine. 
Measuring up to 60 cm in length, most are bottom-dwelling 
scavengers (Figure 34.8) that feed on worms and sick or dead 
fish. Rows of slime glands on a hagfish’s flanks secrete a sub-
stance that absorbs water, forming a slime that may repel 
other scavengers when a hagfish is feeding. When attacked by 
a predator, a hagfish can produce several liters of slime in less 
than a minute. The slime coats the gills of the attacking fish, 
sending it into retreat or even suffocating it. Biologists and 
engineers are investigating the properties of hagfish slime as 
a model for developing a space-filling gel that could be used, 
for instance, to stop bleeding during surgery.
Lampreys
The second group of living jawless vertebrates, the lampreys, 
consists of about 38 species inhabiting various marine and 
freshwater environments (Figure 34.9). Some are parasites 
. Figure 34.9 A sea lamprey. Parasitic lampreys use their mouth 
(inset) and tongue to bore a hole in the side of a fish. The lamprey 
then ingests the blood and other tissues of its host.
Slime glands
. Figure 34.8 A hagfish.
(a)
Closing 
neural tube
Neural
crest
Neural
tube
Migrating neural
crest cellsNotochord
The neural crest consists of 
bilateral bands of cells near 
the margins of the embryonic 
folds that form the neural tube.
(b)Neural crest cells migrate to 
distant sites in the embryo.
(c)The migrating neural crest
cells give rise to some of the 
anatomical structures unique to 
vertebrates, including some of the 
bones and cartilage of the skull. (A
fetal human skull is depicted here.)
. Figure 34.7 The neural crest, embryonic source of many 
unique vertebrate traits.
Hagfishes and Lampreys
The hagfishes (Myxini) 
and the lampreys 
(Petromyzontida) are the 
only lineages of living ver-
tebrates whose members 
lack jaws. Unlike most 
vertebrates, lampreys and 
hagfishes also do not have 
a backbone. Even so, lam-
preys are classified as ver-
tebrates because they have rudimentary vertebrae (composed 
of cartilage, not bone). The hagfishes, in contrast, once were 
thought to lack vertebrae altogether; hence, they were classi-
fied as invertebrate chordates closely related to vertebrates.
In the past few years, however, this interpretation has 
changed. Recent research has shown that hagfishes, like lam-
preys, have rudimentary vertebrae. In addition, a series of 
molecular phylogenetic studies have supported the hypothe-
sis that hagfishes are vertebrates. Molecular analyses also indi-
cate that hagfishes and lampreys are sister groups, as shown in 
Figure 34.2. Together, the hagfishes and lampreys form a clade 
of living jawless vertebrates, the cyclostomes. (All other ver-
tebrates have jaws and make up a much larger clade, the gna-
thostomes, which we will discuss in Concept 34.3.)
Hagfishes
The hagfishes are jawless vertebrates that have highly reduced 
vertebrae and a skull that is made of cartilage. They swim in 
a snakelike fashion by using their segmental muscles to exert 
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   777 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 779 ===

778 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
The earliest fossils of vertebrates date to 500 million years 
ago and include those of conodonts (Figure 34.11), a group 
of slender, soft-bodied vertebrates that lacked jaws and whose 
internal skeleton was composed of cartilage. Conodonts had 
large eyes, which they may have used in locating prey that 
that feed by clamping their round, jawless mouth onto the 
flank of a live fish, their “host.” Parasitic lampreys use their 
rasping mouth and tongue to penetrate the skin of the fish 
and ingest the fish’s blood and other tissues.
As larvae, lampreys live in freshwater streams. The larva 
is a suspension feeder that resembles a lancelet and spends 
much of its time partially buried in sediment. About 20 spe-
cies of lampreys are not parasitic. These species feed only 
as larvae; following several years in streams, they mature 
sexually, reproduce, and die within a few days. In contrast, 
parasitic species of lampreys migrate to the sea or lakes as 
they mature into adults. One such parasite, the sea lamprey 
(Petromyzon marinus), has invaded the Great Lakes over the 
past 170 years and devastated a number of fisheries there.
The skeleton of lampreys is made of cartilage. Unlike the 
cartilage found in most vertebrates, lamprey cartilage contains 
no collagen. Instead, it is a stiff matrix of other proteins. The 
notochord of lampreys persists as the main axial skeleton in 
the adult, as it does in hagfishes. However, lampreys also have 
a flexible sheath around their rodlike notochord. Along the 
length of this sheath, pairs of cartilaginous projections related 
to vertebrae extend dorsally, partially enclosing the nerve cord.
Early Vertebrate Evolution
In the late 1990s, paleontologists working in China discov-
ered a vast collection of fossils of early chordates that appear 
to straddle the transition to vertebrates. The fossils were 
formed 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, 
when many animal groups were undergoing rapid diversifica-
tion (see Concept 32.2).
The most primitive of the fossils are the 3-cm-long 
Haikouella (Figure 34.10). In many ways, Haikouella resem-
bled a lancelet. Its mouth structure indicates that, like lance-
lets, it probably was a suspension feeder. However, Haikouella 
also had some of the characters of vertebrates. For example, 
it had a well-formed brain, small eyes, and muscle segments 
along the body, as do the vertebrate fishes. Unlike the verte-
brates, however, Haikouella did not have a skull or ear organs, 
suggesting that these characters emerged with further inno-
vations to the chordate nervous system. (The earliest “ears” 
were organs for maintaining balance, a function still per-
formed by the ears of humans and other living vertebrates.)
Early signs of a skull can be seen in Myllokunmingia 
(see Figure 34.1). About the same size as Haikouella, 
Myllokunmingia had ear capsules and eye capsules, parts of the 
skull that surround these organs. Based on these and other 
characters, Myllokunmingia is considered the first chordate to 
have a head. The origin of a head—consisting of a brain at the 
anterior end of the dorsal nerve cord, eyes and other sensory 
organs, and a skull—enabled chordates to coordinate more 
complex movement and feeding behaviors. Although it had a 
head, Myllokunmingia lacked vertebrae and hence is not classi-
fied as a vertebrate.
Segmented muscles  
Pharyngeal slits
5 mm
. Figure 34.10 Fossil of an early chordate. Discovered in 1999 
in southern China, Haikouella had eyes and a brain but lacked 
a skull, a trait found in vertebrates. The organism’s color in the 
drawing is fanciful.
0.5 cm
Dental elements
(within
head)
. Figure 34.11 A conodont. Conodonts were early jawless 
vertebrates that lived from 500 million to 200 million years ago. 
Unlike hagfishes and lampreys, conodonts had mineralized 
mouthparts, which they used for either predation or scavenging.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   778 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 780 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 779
Gnathostomes are vertebrates 
that have jaws
Hagfishes and lampreys are survivors from the early Paleozoic 
era, when jawless vertebrates were common. Since then, 
jawless vertebrates have been far outnumbered by the jawed 
vertebrates, the gnathostomes. Living gnathostomes are 
a diverse group that includes sharks and their relatives, 
ray-finned fishes, lobe-finned fishes, amphibians, reptiles 
(including birds), and mammals.
Derived Characters of Gnathostomes
Gnathostomes (“jaw mouth”) are named for their jaws, 
hinged structures that, especially with the help of teeth, 
enable gnathostomes to grip food items firmly and slice 
them. According to one hypothesis, gnathostome jaws 
evolved by modification of the skeletal rods that had 
previously supported the anterior pharyngeal (gill) slits. 
Figure 34.13 shows a stage in this evolutionary process in 
which several of these skeletal rods have been modified 
into precursors of jaws (green) and their structural supports 
(red). The remaining gill slits, no longer required for suspen-
sion feeding, remained as the major sites of respiratory gas 
exchange with the external environment.
Gnathostomes share other derived characters besides 
jaws. The common ancestors of all gnathostomes under-
went an additional duplication of Hox genes, such that the 
single set present in early chordates became four. In fact, 
the entire genome appears to have duplicated, and together 
these genetic changes likely 
enabled the origin of jaws 
and other novel features 
in gnathostomes. The 
gnathostome forebrain is 
enlarged compared to that 
of other vertebrates, and it 
is associated with enhanced 
senses of smell and vision. 
Another characteristic of 
aquatic gnathostomes is the 
1. How are differences in the anatomy of lampreys and con-
odonts reflected in each animal’s feeding method?
2. WHAT IF? In several different animal lineages, organisms 
with a head first appeared around 530 million years ago. 
Does this finding constitute proof that having a head is 
favored by natural selection? Explain.
3. WHAT IF? Suggest key roles that mineralized bone might 
have played in early vertebrates.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
were then impaled on a set of barbed hooks at the anterior 
end of their mouth (see Figure 34.11). These hooks were made 
of dental tissues that were mineralized—hardened by the 
incorporation of minerals such as calcium. The food was then 
passed back to the pharynx, where a different set of dental 
elements sliced and crushed the food.
Conodonts were extremely abundant for 300 million 
years. Their fossilized dental elements are so plentiful that 
they have been used for decades by petroleum geologists as 
guides to the age of rock layers in which they search for oil.
Vertebrates with additional innovations emerged during 
the Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian periods (485–359 
million years ago). These vertebrates had paired fins and, as 
in lampreys, an inner ear with two semicircular canals that 
provided a sense of balance. Like conodonts, these vertebrates 
lacked jaws, but they had a muscular pharynx, which they 
may have used to suck in bottom-dwelling organisms or detri-
tus. They were also armored with mineralized bone, which 
covered varying amounts of their body and may have offered 
protection from predators (Figure 34.12). There were many 
species of these jawless, armored swimming vertebrates, but 
they all became extinct by the end of the Devonian.
Finally, note that the human skeleton is heavily mineral-
ized bone, whereas cartilage plays a fairly minor role. But a 
bony internal skeleton was a relatively late development in 
the history of vertebrates. Instead, the vertebrate skeleton 
evolved initially as a structure made of unmineralized carti-
lage. Steps toward a bony skeleton began 470 million years 
ago, with the appearance of mineralized bone on the outer 
surface of the skull in some jawless vertebrates. Shortly after 
that time, the internal skeleton began to mineralize, first 
as calcified cartilage. By 430 million years ago, some verte-
brates had a thin layer of bone lining the cartilage of their 
internal skeleton. The bones of vertebrates underwent even 
more mineralization in the group we turn to next, the jawed 
vertebrates.
Skeletal 
rods
Modified
skeletal rods
Gill slits Cranium
. Figure 34.13 Possible step 
in the evolution of jawbones.
Pteraspis
Pharyngolepis
. Figure 34.12 Jawless armored vertebrates. Pteraspis and 
Pharyngolepis were two of many genera of jawless vertebrates that 
emerged during the Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian periods.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.2
CONCEPT 34.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   779 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 781 ===

780 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
diverged into the three lineages of jawed vertebrates that sur-
vive today: chondrichthyans, ray-finned fishes, and lobe-fins.
Chondrichthyans (Sharks, Rays,  
and Their Relatives)
Sharks, rays, and their 
relatives include some 
of the biggest and most 
successful vertebrate 
predators in the oceans. 
They belong to the clade 
Chondrichthyes, which 
means “cartilage fish.” As 
their name indicates, the 
chondrichthyans have 
a skeleton composed predominantly of cartilage, though 
often impregnated with calcium.
When the name Chondrichthyes was first coined, in the 
1800s, scientists thought that chondrichthyans represented 
an early stage in the evolution of the vertebrate skeleton and 
that mineralization had evolved only in more derived lin-
eages (such as “bony fishes”). However, as armored jawless 
vertebrates demonstrate, the mineralization of the vertebrate 
skeleton had already begun before the chondrichthyan lineage 
branched off from other vertebrates. Moreover, bone-like tis-
sues have been found in early chondrichthyans, such as the 
fin skeleton of a shark that lived in the Carboniferous period. 
Traces of bone can also be found in living chondrichthyans—in 
their scales, at the base of their teeth, and, in some sharks, in a 
thin layer on the surface of their vertebrae. Such findings indi-
cate that the restricted distribution of bone in the chondrich-
thyan body is a derived condition, emerging after chondrich-
thyans diverged from other gnathostomes.
There are about 1,000 species of living chondrichthyans. 
The largest and most diverse group consists of the sharks, 
rays, and skates (Figure 34.15a and b). A second group is 
composed of a few dozen species of ratfishes, also called chi-
maeras (Figure 34.15c).
Most sharks have a streamlined body and are swift swim-
mers, but they do not maneuver very well. Powerful move-
ments of the trunk and the tail fin propel them forward. 
The dorsal fins function mainly as stabilizers, and the 
paired pectoral (fore) and pelvic (hind) fins are important 
for maneuvering. Although a shark gains buoyancy by 
storing a large amount of oil in its huge liver, the animal 
is still more dense than water, and if it stops swimming it 
sinks. Continual swimming also ensures that water flows 
into the shark’s mouth and out through the gills, where gas 
exchange occurs. However, some sharks and many skates 
and rays spend a good deal of time resting on the seafloor. 
When resting, they use muscles of their jaws and pharynx to 
pump water over the gills.
lateral line system, organs that form a row along each side 
of the body and are sensitive to vibrations in the surround-
ing water. Precursors of these organs were present in the head 
shields of some jawless vertebrates.
Fossil Gnathostomes
Gnathostomes appeared in the fossil record about 440 million 
years ago and steadily became more diverse. Their success 
probably resulted from a combination of anatomical features: 
Their paired fins and tail (which were also found in jawless 
vertebrates) allowed them to swim efficiently after prey, and 
their jaws enabled them to grab prey or simply bite off chunks 
of flesh. Over time, dorsal, ventral, and anal fins stiffened by 
bony structures called fin rays also evolved in some early gna-
thostomes. Fin rays provide thrust and steering control when 
aquatic vertebrates swim after prey or away from predators. 
Faster swimming was supported by other adaptations, includ-
ing a more efficient gas exchange system in the gills.
The earliest gnathostomes include extinct lineages of 
armored vertebrates known collectively as placoderms, 
which means “plate-skinned.” Most placoderms were less than 
a meter long, though some giants measured more than 10 m 
(Figure 34.14). Other jawed vertebrates, called acanthodians, 
emerged at roughly the same time and radiated during the 
Silurian and Devonian periods (444–359 million years ago). 
Placoderms had disappeared by 359 million years ago, and 
acanthodians became extinct about 70 million years later.
Overall, a series of recent fossil discoveries have revealed that 
440–420 million years ago was a period of tumultuous evolu-
tionary change. Gnathostomes that lived during this period had 
highly variable forms, and by 420 million years ago, they had 
0.5 m
. Figure 34.14 Fossil of an early gnathostome. A formidable 
predator, the placoderm Dunkleosteus grew up to 10 m in length. 
Its jaw structure indicates that Dunkleosteus could exert a force of 
560 kg/cm2 (8,000 pounds per square inch) at the tip of its jaws.
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   780 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 782 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 781
sharp teeth to tear flesh from animals too large to swallow 
in one piece. Sharks have several rows of teeth that gradu-
ally move to the front of the mouth as old teeth are lost. The 
digestive tract of many sharks is proportionately shorter 
than that of many other vertebrates. Within the shark intes-
tine is a spiral valve, a corkscrew-shaped ridge that increases 
surface area and prolongs the passage of food through the 
digestive tract.
Acute senses are adaptations that go along with the 
active, carnivorous lifestyle of sharks. Sharks have sharp 
vision but cannot distinguish colors. The nostrils of sharks, 
like those of most aquatic vertebrates, open into dead-end 
cups. They function only for olfaction (smelling), not for 
breathing. Like some other vertebrates, sharks have a pair 
of regions in the skin of their head that can detect electric 
fields generated by the muscle contractions of nearby ani-
mals. Like all nonmammalian aquatic vertebrates, sharks 
have no eardrums, structures that terrestrial vertebrates 
use to transmit sound waves in air to the auditory organs. 
Sound reaches a shark through water, and the animal’s 
entire body transmits the sound to the hearing organs of 
the inner ear.
Shark eggs are fertilized internally. The male has a 
pair of claspers on its pelvic fins that transfer sperm into 
the female’s reproductive tract. Some species of sharks 
are oviparous; they lay eggs that hatch outside the 
mother’s body. These sharks release their fertilized eggs 
after encasing them in protective coats. Other species 
are ovoviviparous; they retain the fertilized eggs in the 
oviduct. Nourished by the egg yolk, the embryos develop 
into young that are born after hatching within the uterus. 
A few species are viviparous; the young develop within 
the uterus and obtain nourishment prior to birth by receiv-
ing nutrients from the mother’s blood through a yolk sac 
placenta, by absorbing a nutritious fluid produced by the 
uterus, or by eating other eggs. The reproductive tract of 
the shark empties along with the excretory system and 
digestive tract into the cloaca, a common chamber that 
has a single opening to the outside.
Although rays are closely related to sharks, they have 
adopted a very different lifestyle. Most rays are bottom-
dwellers that feed by using their jaws to crush molluscs 
and crustaceans. They have a flattened shape and use their 
greatly enlarged pectoral fins like water wings to propel 
themselves through the water. The tail of many rays is 
whiplike and, in some species, bears venomous barbs that 
function in defense.
Chondrichthyans have thrived for over 400 million 
years. Today, however, they are severely threatened by 
overfishing. For example, a recent report indicated that 
shark populations in the Pacific have plummeted by up to 
95%, and shark populations that live closest to people have 
declined the most.
(a) Blacktip reef shark (Carcharhinus melanopterus). Sharks are fast 
swimmers with acute senses. Like all gnathostomes, they have 
paired pectoral and pelvic fins.
(b) Southern stingray (Dasyatis americana). Most rays are bottom-  
dwellers that feed on molluscs and crustaceans. Some rays cruise in 
open water and scoop food into their gaping mouths.
(c)Spotted ratfish (Hydrolagus colliei). Ratfishes, or chimaeras, 
typically live at depths greater than 80 m and feed on shrimp, 
molluscs, and sea urchins. Some species have a venomous spine at 
the front of their first dorsal fin.
Pelvic fins
Dorsal fins
Pectoral fins
. Figure 34.15 Chondrichthyans.
The largest sharks and rays are suspension feeders that 
consume plankton. Most sharks, however, are carnivores 
that swallow their prey whole or use their powerful jaws and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   781 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 783 ===

782 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
In nearly all fishes, the skin is covered by flattened, bony 
scales that differ in structure from the tooth-like scales of 
sharks. Glands in the skin secrete a slimy mucus over the skin, 
an adaptation that reduces drag during swimming. Like the 
ancient aquatic gnathostomes mentioned earlier, fishes have 
a lateral line system, which is evident as a row of tiny pits in 
the skin on either side of the body.
The details of fish reproduction vary extensively. Most spe-
cies are oviparous, reproducing by external fertilization after 
the female sheds large numbers of small eggs. However, inter-
nal fertilization and birthing characterize other species.
Ray-Finned Fishes
Nearly all the aquatic osteichthyans familiar to us are 
among the over 27,000 species of ray-finned fishes 
(Actinopterygii) (Figure 34.17). Named for the bony rays that 
support their fins, the ray-finned fishes originated during the 
Silurian period (444–419 million years ago). The group has 
diversified greatly since that time, resulting in numerous spe-
cies and many modifications in body form and fin structure 
that affect maneuvering, defense, and other functions.
Ray-finned fishes serve as a major source of protein for 
humans, who have harvested them for thousands of years. 
However, industrial-scale fishing operations have driven 
some of the world’s biggest fisheries to collapse. For example, 
after decades of abundant harvests, in the 1990s the catch of 
cod (Gadus morhua) in the northwest Atlantic plummeted to 
just 5% of its historic maximum, bringing cod fishing there 
to a near halt. Despite ongoing restrictions on the fishery, 
cod populations have yet to recover to sustainable levels. Ray-
finned fishes also face other pressures from humans, such as 
the diversion of rivers by dams. Changing water flow patterns 
can hamper the fishes’ ability to obtain food and interferes 
with migratory pathways and spawning grounds.
Lobe-Fins
Like the ray-finned fishes, the other major lineage of osteich-
thyans, the lobe-fins (Sarcopterygii), also originated during 
Ray-Finned Fishes and Lobe-Fins
The vast majority of verte-
brates belong to the clade 
of gnathostomes called 
Osteichthyes. Unlike 
chondrichthyans, nearly 
all living osteichthyans 
have an ossified (bony) 
endoskeleton with a 
hard matrix of calcium 
phosphate. The name 
Osteichthyes (“bony fish”) was coined long before the advent 
of phylogenetic systematics. When it was originally defined, 
the group excluded tetrapods, but we now know that such a 
taxon would be paraphyletic (see Figure 34.2). Therefore, sys-
tematists today include tetrapods along with bony fishes in 
the clade Osteichthyes. Clearly, the name of the group does 
not accurately describe all of its members.
This section discusses the aquatic osteichthyans known 
informally as fishes. Most fishes breathe by drawing water 
over four or five pairs of gills located in chambers covered by 
a protective bony flap called the operculum (Figure 34.16). 
Water is drawn into the mouth, through the pharynx, and 
out between the gills by movement of the operculum and 
contraction of muscles surrounding the gill chambers.
Most fishes can maintain a buoyancy equal to the surround-
ing water by filling an air sac known as a swim bladder. (If a 
fish swims to greater depths or toward the surface, where water 
pressure differs, the fish shuttles gas between its blood and swim 
bladder, keeping the volume of gas in the bladder constant.) 
Charles Darwin proposed that the lungs of tetrapods evolved 
from swim bladders, but strange as it may sound, the opposite 
seems to be true: Swim bladders arose from lungs. Osteichthyans 
in many early-branching lineages have lungs, which they use to 
breathe air as a supplement to gas exchange in their gills. This 
suggests that lungs arose in early osteichthyans; later, swim 
bladders evolved from lungs in some lineages.
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
Nostril
Brain
Spinal cord
Dorsal finSwim
bladder
Adipose fin
(characteristic
of trout)
Caudal
fin
Anal fin
Lateral
line
Urinary
bladder
Anus
Pelvic
fin
Gonad
Intestine
Stomach
Liver
Heart
Kidney
Gills
Cut edge
of operculum
. Figure 34.16 Anatomy of a  
trout, a ray-finned fish.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   782 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 784 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 783
the coelacanths (Actinistia), was thought to have become extinct 
75 million years ago. However, in 1938, fishermen caught a liv-
ing coelacanth off the east coast of South Africa (Figure 34.19). 
Until the 1990s, all subsequent discoveries were near the 
Comoros Islands in the western Indian Ocean. Since 1999, coela-
canths have also been found at various places along the eastern 
coast of Africa and in the eastern Indian Ocean, near Indonesia. 
The Indonesian population may represent a second species.
The second lineage of living lobe-fins, the lungfishes 
(Dipnoi), is represented today by six species in three gen-
era, all of which are found in the Southern Hemisphere. 
Lungfishes arose in the ocean but today are found only in 
fresh water, generally in stagnant ponds and swamps. They 
surface to gulp air into lungs connected to their pharynx. 
Lungfishes also have gills, which are the main organs for gas 
exchange in Australian lungfishes. When ponds shrink dur-
ing the dry season, some lungfishes can burrow into the mud 
and estivate (wait in a state of torpor; see Concept 40.4).
the Silurian period (Figure 34.18). The key derived character 
of lobe-fins is the presence of rod-shaped bones surrounded 
by a thick layer of muscle in their pectoral and pelvic fins. 
During the Devonian (419–359 million years ago), many 
lobe-fins lived in brackish waters, such as in coastal wetlands. 
There they may have used their lobed fins to help them move 
across logs or the muddy bottom (as do some living lobe-fins). 
Some Devonian lobe-fins were gigantic predators. It is not 
uncommon to find spike-shaped fossils of Devonian lobe-fin 
teeth as big as your thumb.
By the end of the Devonian period, lobe-fin diversity was 
dwindling, and today only three lineages survive. One lineage, 
. Figure 34.19 A coelacanth (Latimeria). These lobe-fins were 
found living off the coasts of southern Africa and Indonesia.
Lower
jaw
Dorsal
spine
Scaly covering
5 cm
m Figure 34.18 A reconstruction of an ancient lobe-fin. 
Discovered in 2009, Guiyu oneiros is the earliest known lobe-fin, 
dating to 420 million years ago. The fossil of this species was nearly 
complete, allowing for an accurate reconstruction; regions shown in 
gray were missing from the fossil.
m Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares) is a fast-swimming schooling 
fish that is commercially important worldwide.  
c Native to coral reefs of 
the Pacific Ocean, the 
brightly colored red 
lionfish (Pterois volitans) 
can inject venom through 
its spines, causing a 
severe and painful 
reaction in humans.
m The sea horse has a highly 
modified body form, as 
exemplified by Hippocampus 
ramulosus, shown above. Sea 
horses are unusual among 
animals in that the male 
carries the young during their 
embryonic development.
m The fine-spotted moray eel 
(Gymnothorax dovii) is a 
predator that ambushes 
    prey from crevices in its 
    coral reef habitat.
m Figure 34.17 Ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii).
 Mastering Biology Video: Sea Horse Camouflage
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   783 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 785 ===

784 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Derived Characters of Tetrapods
The most significant character of tetrapods gives the group its 
name, which means “four feet” in Greek. In place of pectoral 
and pelvic fins, tetrapods have limbs with digits. Limbs support 
a tetrapod’s weight on land, while feet with digits efficiently 
transmit muscle-generated forces to the ground when it walks.
Life on land selected for numerous other changes to the 
tetrapod body plan. In tetrapods, the head is separated from 
the body by a neck that originally had one vertebra on which 
the skull could move up and down. Later, with the origin of a 
second vertebra in the neck, the head could also swing from 
side to side. The bones of the pelvic girdle, to which the hind 
legs are attached, are fused to the backbone, permitting forces 
generated by the hind legs against the ground to be trans-
ferred to the rest of the body. Except for some fully aquatic 
species (such as the axolotl; see Figure 43.1), the adults of 
living tetrapods do not have gills; during embryonic develop-
ment, the pharyngeal clefts instead give rise to parts of the 
ears, certain glands, and other structures.
We’ll discuss later how some of these characters were dra-
matically altered or lost in various lineages of tetrapods. In 
birds, for example, the pectoral limbs became wings, and in 
whales, the entire body converged toward a fishlike shape.
The third lineage of lobe-fins that survives today is far 
more diverse than the coelacanths or the lungfishes. During 
the mid-Devonian, these organisms adapted to life on 
land and gave rise to vertebrates with limbs and feet, called 
tetrapods—a lineage that includes humans.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.3
1. What derived characters do sharks and tuna share? What 
features distinguish tuna from sharks?
2. Describe key adaptations of aquatic gnathostomes.
3. DRAW IT Redraw Figure 34.2 to show four lineages: cyclo-
stomes, lancelets, gnathostomes, and tunicates. Label the 
vertebrate common ancestor and circle the lineage that 
includes humans.
4. WHAT IF? Imagine that we could replay the history of life. 
Is it possible that a group of vertebrates that colonized land 
could have arisen from aquatic gnathostomes other than the 
lobe-fins? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Scales
Fins
Gills and lungs
Fish
Characters
Neck
Ribs
Fin skeleton
Flat skull
Eyes on top of skull
Head
Shoulder bones
Elbow
Humerus
Ulna
“Wrist”
Radius
Eyes on top of skull
Flat skull
Neck
Ribs
Fin skeleton
Scales
Fin
T etrapod
Characters
CONCEPT 34.4
Tetrapods are gnathostomes  
that have limbs
One of the most significant events in vertebrate history took 
place by 365 million years ago, as the fins of a lineage of lobe-
fins gradually evolved into the limbs and feet of tetrapods. 
Until then, all vertebrates had shared the same basic fishlike 
anatomy. After the colonization of land,  
tetrapods diversified greatly and gave rise  
to many new forms, from leaping  
frogs to flying eagles to  
bipedal humans.
m Figure 34.20 Discovery of a “fishapod”: Tiktaalik. Paleontologists were on the hunt 
for fossils that could shed light on the evolutionary origin of tetrapods. Based on the ages of 
previously discovered fossils, researchers were looking for a dig site with rocks about 365–385 
million years old. Ellesmere Island, in the Canadian Arctic, was one of the few such sites 
that was also likely to contain fossils, because it was once a river. The search at this site was 
rewarded by the discovery of fossils of a 375-million-year-old lobe-fin, named Tiktaalik. As 
shown in the chart and photographs, Tiktaalik exhibits both fish and tetrapod characters.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Describe how Tiktaalik’s  
features illustrate Darwin’s concept of descent  
with modification (see Concept 21.2).
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video:  
Great Transitions: The Origin  
of Tetrapods  
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   784 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 786 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 785
The Origin of Tetrapods
As you have read, the Devonian coastal 
wetlands were home to a wide range of 
lobe-fins. Those that entered shallow, 
oxygen-poor water could have used 
their lungs to breathe air. Some species 
probably used their stout fins to swim 
and “walk” underwater across the bot-
tom (moving their fins in an alternat-
ing gait, as do some living lobe-fins). 
This suggests that the tetrapod body 
plan did not evolve “out of nowhere” 
but was simply a modification of a pre-
existing body plan.
The recent discovery of a fossil called 
Tiktaalik provided new details on how 
this process of modification occurred 
(Figure 34.20). Like a fish, this species 
had fins, gills, and lungs, and its body 
was covered in scales. But unlike a fish, 
Tiktaalik had a full set of ribs that would 
have helped it breathe air and support 
its body. Also unlike a fish, Tiktaalik 
had a neck, allowing it to move its 
head about. In addition, the bones of 
Tiktaalik’s front fin have the same basic 
pattern found in all limbed animals: 
one bone (the humerus), followed by 
two bones (the radius and ulna), fol-
lowed by a group of small bones that 
comprise the wrist. Finally, Tiktaalik’s 
pelvis and rear fin were larger and more 
robust than those of a fish; the pelvis is 
the bony structure to which hind limbs 
are attached in tetrapods. Although 
it is unlikely that Tiktaalik could walk 
on land, the skeletal structure of its fins and pelvis suggests 
that it could prop itself up and walk in water on its fins. Since 
Tiktaalik predates the oldest known tetrapod, its features sug-
gest that key “tetrapod” traits, such as a wrist, ribs, and a neck, 
were in fact ancestral to the tetrapod lineage.
Tiktaalik and other extraordinary fossil discoveries have 
allowed paleontologists to reconstruct how fins became pro-
gressively more limb-like over time, culminating in the appear-
ance in the fossil record of the first tetrapods 365 million years 
ago (Figure 34.21). Over the next 60 million years, a great 
diversity of tetrapods arose. Some of these species retained 
functional gills and had weak limbs, while others lost their 
gills and had stronger limbs that facilitated walking on land. 
Overall, judging from the morphology and locations of their 
fossils, most of these early tetrapods probably remained tied 
to water, a characteristic they share with some members of the 
most basal group of living tetrapods, the amphibians.
VISUAL SKILLS Assuming the branch point dates shown in this diagram are accurate, what range of 
dates would include the origin of amphibians?
Time (millions of years ago)
415 400 385 370 355 340 325 310 295 280 265 0
PermianCarboniferous
PALEOZOIC
Devonian
Silurian
Lungfishes
Eusthenopteron
Panderichthys
Tiktaalik
Acanthostega
Tulerpeton
Amphibians
Amniotes
Limbs
with digits
Ulna
Radius
Humerus
Key to
limb bones
m Figure 34.21 Steps in the origin of limbs with digits. The white bars on the branches 
of this diagram place known fossils in time; arrowheads indicate lineages that extend to today. 
The drawings of extinct organisms are based on fossilized skeletons, but the colors are fanciful.
Amphibians
The amphibians are rep-
resented today by about 
6,150 species in three 
clades: salamanders (clade 
Urodela, “tailed ones”), 
frogs (clade Anura, “tail-
less ones”), and caecilians 
(clade Apoda, “legless 
ones”).
Salamanders
There are about 550 known species of urodeles, or salaman-
ders. Some are entirely aquatic, but others live on land as 
adults or throughout life. Most salamanders that live on 
land walk with a side-to-side bending of the body, a trait 
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   785 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 787 ===

786 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Lifestyle and Ecology of Amphibians
The term amphibian (derived from amphibious, meaning 
“both ways of life”) refers to the life stages of many frog spe-
cies that live first in water and then on land (Figure 34.23). 
The larval stage of a frog, called a tadpole, is usually an 
aquatic herbivore with gills, a lateral line system resem-
bling that of aquatic vertebrates, and a long, finned tail. The 
tadpole initially lacks legs; it swims by undulating its tail. 
During the metamorphosis that leads to the “second life,” 
the tadpole develops legs, lungs, a pair of external eardrums, 
and a digestive system adapted to a carnivorous diet. At the 
same time, the gills disappear; the lateral line system also 
disappears in most species. The young frog crawls onto shore 
and becomes a terrestrial hunter. In spite of their name, 
however, many amphibians do not live a dual—aquatic and 
terrestrial—life. There are some strictly aquatic or strictly 
terrestrial frogs, salamanders, and caecilians. Moreover, sala-
mander and caecilian larvae look much like the adults, and 
typically both the larvae and the adults are carnivorous.
Most amphibians are found in damp habitats such as 
swamps and rain forests. Even those adapted to drier habitats 
spend much of their time in burrows or under moist leaves, 
where humidity is high. One reason amphibians require 
relatively wet habitats is that they rely heavily on their moist 
skin for gas exchange—if their skin dries out, they cannot get 
enough oxygen. In addition, amphibians typically lay their 
eggs in water or in moist environments on land; their eggs 
lack a shell and dehydrate quickly in dry air.
Fertilization is external in most amphibians; the male 
grasps the female and spills his sperm over the eggs as the 
female sheds them (see Figure 34.23c). Some amphibian spe-
cies lay vast numbers of eggs in temporary pools, and egg 
mortality is high. In contrast, other species lay relatively few 
also found in early terrestrial tetrapods (Figure 34.22a). 
Paedomorphosis is common among aquatic salamanders; the 
axolotl, for instance, retains larval features even when sexu-
ally mature (see Figure 25.25).
Frogs
Numbering about 5,420 species, anurans, or frogs, are 
better suited than salamanders to locomotion on land 
(Figure 34.22b). Adult frogs use their powerful hind legs to 
hop along the terrain. Although often distinctive in appear-
ance, the animals known as “toads” are simply frogs that have 
leathery skin or other adaptations for life on land. A frog nabs 
insects and other prey by flicking out its long, sticky tongue, 
which is attached to the front of the mouth. Frogs display a 
great variety of adaptations that help them avoid being eaten 
by larger predators. Their skin glands secrete distasteful or even 
poisonous mucus. Many poisonous species have color patterns 
that camouflage them or have bright coloration, which preda-
tors appear to associate with danger (see Figure 54.6).
Caecilians
The approximately 170 species of apodans, or caecilians, 
are legless and nearly blind, and superficially they resemble 
earthworms (Figure 34.22c). Their absence of legs is a sec-
ondary adaptation, as they evolved from a legged ancestor. 
Caecilians inhabit tropical areas, where most species burrow 
in moist forest soil.
Order Urodela. 
Urodeles (sala-
manders) retain 
their tail as adults.
(a)
Order Anura. 
Anurans (toads and 
frogs) lack a tail
as adults.
(b)
Order Apoda. 
Apodans, or caecilians,
are legless, mainly 
burrowing amphibians.
(c)
m Figure 34.22 Amphibians.
(c)The adults return to 
water to mate. The 
male grasps the 
female, stimulating 
her to release eggs. 
The eggs are laid 
and fertilized in 
water. They have a 
jelly coat but lack a 
shell and would 
desiccate in air.
(a) The tadpole is an aquatic 
herbivore with a fishlike tail and 
internal gills.
(b) During metamorphosis, the 
gills and tail are resorbed, and 
walking legs develop. The 
adult frog will live on land.
m Figure 34.23 The “dual life” of a frog (Rana temporaria).
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   786 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 788 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 787
usually quiet, but the males of many species vocalize to defend 
their breeding territory or to attract females. In some species, 
migrations to specific breeding sites may involve vocal com-
munication, celestial navigation, or chemical signaling.
Over the past 30 years, zoologists have documented a rapid 
and alarming decline in amphibian populations in locations 
throughout the world. There appear to be several causes, 
including the spread of a disease-causing chytrid fungus (see 
Figure 31.25), habitat loss, climate change, and pollution. In 
some cases, declines have become extinctions. Recent studies 
indicate that at least nine amphibian species have become 
extinct within the last four decades; more than 100 other spe-
cies have not been observed in that time and are considered 
possibly extinct. In the Problem-Solving Exercise, you can 
explore one possible strategy to prevent amphibian deaths 
from fungal infections.
eggs and display various types of parental care. Depending on 
the species, either males or females may house eggs on their 
back (Figure 34.24), in their mouth, or even in their stomach. 
Certain tropical tree frogs stir their egg masses into moist, 
foamy nests that resist drying.
Many amphibians exhibit complex and diverse social 
behaviors, especially during breeding seasons. Frogs are 
b Figure 34.24 A 
mobile nursery. 
A female marsupial 
frog (Flectonotus 
fitzgeraldi) 
incubates her eggs 
in pouches of skin 
on her back.
In this exercise, you will investigate whether amphibians can acquire resistance to the 
fungal pathogen Bd.
Your Approach The principle guiding your investigation is that prior exposure 
to a pathogen can enable amphibians to acquire immunological resistance to that 
pathogen. To see whether this occurs after exposure to Bd, you will analyze data on 
acquired resistance in Cuban tree frogs (Osteopilus septentrionalis).
Your Data To create variation in number of prior exposures to Bd, Cuban tree frogs 
were exposed to Bd and cleared of their infection (using heat treatments) from zero 
to three times; frogs with no prior exposures are referred to as “naive.” Researchers 
then exposed frogs to Bd and measured mean abundance of Bd on the frog’s skin, 
frog survival, and abundance of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell involved in 
the vertebrate immune response).
   Instructors: A version of this Problem-Solving  
Exercise can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
PROBLEM-SOLVING EXERCISE
Can declining amphibian 
populations be saved by  
a vaccine?
Amphibian populations are declining rapidly 
worldwide. The fungus Batrachochytrium 
dendrobatidis (Bd) has contributed to this 
decline: This pathogen causes severe skin 
infections in many amphibian species, leading 
to massive die-offs. Efforts to save amphibians 
from Bd have had limited success, and 
there is little evidence that frogs and other 
amphibians have acquired resistance to 
Bd on 
their own.
Yellow-legged frogs (Rana muscosa) in 
California killed by Bd infection
24,000
12,000
16,000
14,000
18,000
20,000
22,000
0
01234
Bd abundance on frog’s 
skin (organisms/g of frog)
Number of prior 
Bd exposures
80
70
10
30
20
40
50
60
0
01234
Percentage survival
Number of prior 
Bd exposures
Your Analysis
1. Describe and interpret the results shown in the figure.
2. ( a ) Graph the data in the table. (b) Based on these data, develop a hypothesis 
that explains the results discussed in question 1.
3. Breeding populations of amphibian species threatened by Bd have been estab-
lished in captivity. In addition, evidence suggests that Cuban tree frogs can  
acquire resistance after exposure to dead Bd. Based on this information and 
your answers to questions 1 and 2, suggest a strategy for repopulating regions 
decimated by Bd.
Number  
of prior  
Bd  
exposures
Thousands of 
lymphocytes 
per g of frog
0 134
1 240
2 244
3 227
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   787 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 789 ===

788 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Derived Characters of Amniotes
Amniotes are named for the major derived character of the 
clade, the amniotic egg, which contains four specialized 
membranes: the amnion, the chorion, the yolk sac, and the 
allantois (Figure 34.26). Called extraembryonic membranes 
because they are not part of the body of the embryo itself, 
these membranes develop from tissue layers that grow out 
from the embryo. The amniotic egg is named for the amnion, 
which encloses a compartment of fluid that bathes the 
embryo and acts as a hydraulic shock absorber. The other 
membranes in the egg function in gas exchange, the transfer 
of stored nutrients to the embryo, and waste storage. The 
amniotic egg was a key evolutionary innovation for terrestrial 
life: It allowed the embryo to develop on land in its own pri-
vate “pond,” hence reducing the dependence of tetrapods on 
an aqueous environment for reproduction.
In contrast to the shell-less eggs of amphibians, the amniotic 
eggs of most reptiles and some mammals have a shell. A shell 
slows dehydration of the egg in air, an adaptation that helped 
amniotes to occupy a wider range of terrestrial habitats than 
amphibians, their closest living relatives. (Seeds played a similar 
role in the evolution of plants, as discussed in Concept 30.1.) 
1. Describe the origin of tetrapods and identify some of their 
key derived traits.
2. Some amphibians never leave the water, whereas others can 
survive in relatively dry terrestrial environments. Contrast 
the adaptations that facilitate these two lifestyles.
3. WHAT IF? Scientists think that amphibian populations may 
provide an early warning system of environmental problems. 
What features of amphibians might make them particularly 
sensitive to environmental problems?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.4
CONCEPT 34.5
Amniotes are tetrapods that have 
a terrestrially adapted egg
The amniotes are a group of tetrapods whose extant mem-
bers are the reptiles (including birds, as we’ll discuss in this 
section) and mammals (Figure 34.25). During their evolu-
tion, amniotes acquired a number of new adaptations to 
life on land.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on this phylogeny, 
are pterosaurs dinosaurs? Are birds? 
Explain.
ANCESTRAL
AMNIOTE
Crocodilians
†Plesiosaurs
†Ichthyosaurs
†Pterosaurs
†Ornithischian
  dinosaurs
†
Birds
Tuataras
Squamates
(lizards and
snakes)
Mammals
Turtles
Archosaurs
Dinosaurs
Saurischians
Lepidosaurs
DiapsidsSynapsids
Saurischian
dinosaurs other
than birds
Common
ancestor
of reptiles
c Figure 34.25 A phylogeny of 
amniotes. Extant groups are named at 
the tips of the branches in boldface type. 
The dagger symbols (†) indicate extinct 
groups.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   788 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 790 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 789
Present-day amniotes include two large clades of terrestrial 
vertebrates: reptiles and mammals.
Reptiles
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
Living members of the 
reptile clade include turtles, 
tuataras, lizards and snakes, 
crocodilians, and birds (see 
Figure 34.25). There are 
about 20,800 species of rep-
tiles, the majority of which 
are squamates (lizards and 
snakes; 10,425 species) or 
birds (10,000 species).
As a group, the reptiles share several derived characters 
that distinguish them from other tetrapods. For example, 
unlike amphibians, reptiles have scales that contain the pro-
tein keratin (as does a human nail). Scales help protect the 
animal’s skin from desiccation and abrasion. In addition, 
most reptiles lay their shelled eggs on land; the shell protects 
the egg from drying out (Figure 34.28). Fertilization occurs 
internally, before the eggshell is secreted.
Reptiles such as lizards and snakes are sometimes described 
as “cold-blooded” because they do not use their metabolism 
Most mammals have lost the eggshell over the course of their 
evolution, and the embryo avoids desiccation by developing 
within the amnion inside the mother’s body.
Amniotes have acquired other key adaptations to life on 
land. For example, amniotes use their rib cage to ventilate 
their lungs. This method is more efficient than throat-based 
ventilation, which amphibians use as a supplement to breath-
ing through their skin. The increased efficiency of rib cage 
ventilation may have allowed amniotes to abandon breath-
ing through their skin and develop less permeable skin, 
thereby conserving water.
Early Amniotes
The most recent common ancestor of living amphibians 
and amniotes lived 350 million years ago. Based on where 
their fossils have been found, the earliest amniotes lived in 
warm, moist areas, as did the first tetrapods. Over time, early 
amniotes expanded into a wide range of new environments, 
including dry and high-latitude regions. Fossil evidence 
shows that the earliest amniotes resembled small lizards with 
sharp teeth, a sign that they were predators (Figure 34.27). 
Later groups of amniotes also included herbivores, as evi-
denced by their grinding teeth and other features.
Embryo
Amniotic cavity
with amniotic 
fluid
Yolk
(nutrients)
Shell
Albumen
Allantois. The allantois is 
a disposal sac for certain 
metabolic wastes 
produced by the embryo.
Amnion. The amnion protects 
the embryo in a fluid-filled 
cavity that cushions against 
mechanical shock.
Chorion. The chorion and the 
membrane of the allantois 
exchange gases between the 
embryo and the air. 
Yolk sac. The yolk sac contains 
the yolk, a stockpile of 
nutrients. Other nutrients are 
stored in the albumen (”egg 
white”).
Extraembryonic membranes
Extraembryonic membranes
. Figure 34.26 The amniotic egg. The embryos of reptiles 
and mammals form four extraembryonic membranes: the 
allantois, chorion, amnion, and yolk sac. This diagram shows these 
membranes in the shelled egg of a reptile.
. Figure 34.27 Artist’s reconstruction of Hylonomus, an 
early amniote. About 25 cm long, this species lived 310 million 
years ago and probably ate insects and other small invertebrates.
. Figure 34.28 Hatching reptiles. These baby panther chameleons 
(Furcifer pardalis) are breaking out of their parchment-like shells, a 
common type of shell among living reptiles other than birds.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   789 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 791 ===

790 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
led to the conclusion that many dinosaurs were agile and fast 
moving. Dinosaurs had a limb structure that enabled them 
to walk and run more efficiently than could earlier tetrapods, 
which had a sprawling gait. Fossilized footprints and other 
evidence suggest that some species were social—they lived 
and traveled in groups, much as many mammals do today. 
Paleontologists have also discovered evidence that some dino-
saurs built nests and protected their eggs, as birds do today 
(see Figure 22.17). Finally, some anatomical evidence supports 
the hypothesis that at least some dinosaurs were endotherms.
All dinosaurs except birds became extinct by the end of 
the Cretaceous period (66 million years ago). Their extinction 
may have been caused at least in part by the asteroid or comet 
impact described in Concept 25.4. Some analyses of the fossil 
record are consistent with this idea in that they show a sud-
den decline in dinosaur diversity at the end of the Cretaceous. 
However, other analyses indicate that the number of dinosaur 
species had begun to decline several million years before the 
Cretaceous ended. Further fossil discoveries and new analyses 
will be needed to resolve this debate.
Next, we’ll discuss the three extant lineages of reptiles, the 
turtles, lepidosaurs (tuataras, lizards, and snakes), and archo-
saurs (crocodilians and birds).
Turtles
Turtles are one of the most distinctive groups of reptiles alive 
today. For example, turtles do not have any holes in their 
skull behind the eye sockets, whereas other reptiles have two 
holes behind each eye socket. Recall that such skull holes 
are a key derived trait of the diapsids. Thus, until recently it 
was not clear whether turtles—like all other living reptiles—
should be classified within the diapsid clade. However, in 
2015, new fossil discoveries showed that early turtles had the 
skull openings found in other diapsids. This suggests that 
turtles are diapsids that have lost the holes in their skull over 
extensively to control their body temperature. However, they 
do regulate their body temperature by using behavioral adapta-
tions. For example, many lizards bask in the sun when the air is 
cool and seek shade when the air is too warm. A more accurate 
description of these reptiles is to say that they are ectothermic, 
which means that they absorb external heat as their main source 
of body heat. By warming themselves directly with solar energy 
rather than through the metabolic breakdown of food, an ecto-
thermic reptile can survive on less than 10% of the food energy 
required by a mammal of the same size. But the reptile clade is 
not entirely ectothermic; birds are endothermic, capable of 
maintaining body temperature through metabolic activity.
The Origin and Evolutionary Radiation of Reptiles
Fossil evidence indicates that the earliest reptiles lived about 
310 million years ago and resembled lizards. Like all reptiles 
today, these early reptiles were diapsids. A key derived char-
acter of diapsids is a pair of holes on each side of the skull, 
behind the eye sockets; muscles pass through these holes and 
attach to the jaw, controlling jaw movement.
The diapsids are composed of three main lineages. The first 
lineage includes the turtles. A second lineage gave rise to the 
lepidosaurs, which include tuataras, lizards, and snakes. 
This lineage also produced some marine reptiles, including 
the giant mososaurs. Some of these marine species rivaled 
today’s whales in length; all of them are extinct. The third 
diapsid lineage, the archosaurs, produced the crocodilians, 
pterosaurs, and dinosaurs. Our focus here will be on extinct 
lineages of archosaurs; we’ll discuss living reptiles shortly.
Pterosaurs, which originated in the late Triassic, were 
the first tetrapods to exhibit flapping flight. The pterosaur 
wing was completely different from the wings of birds and 
bats. It consisted of a collagen-strengthened membrane that 
stretched between the trunk or hind leg and a very long digit 
on the foreleg. The smallest pterosaurs were no bigger than a 
sparrow, and the largest had a wingspan of nearly 11 m. They 
appear to have converged on many of the ecological roles 
later played by birds; some were insect-eaters, others grabbed 
fish out of the ocean, and still others filtered small animals 
through thousands of fine needlelike teeth. But by 66 million 
years ago, pterosaurs had become extinct.
On land, the dinosaurs diversified into a vast range of 
shapes and sizes, from bipeds the size of a pigeon to 45-m-long 
quadrupeds with necks long enough to let them browse the 
tops of trees. One lineage of dinosaurs, the ornithischians, 
were herbivores; they included many species with elaborate 
defenses against predators, such as tail clubs and horned crests. 
The other main lineage of dinosaurs, the saurischians, included 
the long-necked giants and a group called the theropods, 
which were bipedal carnivores. Theropods included the 
famous Tyrannosaurus rex as well as the ancestors of birds.
Dinosaurs once were considered slow, sluggish creatures. 
Since the 1970s, however, fossil discoveries and research have 
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Paul Sereno: Adventures  
hunting dinosaurs
 Mastering Biology H H M I  V i d e o :  H o w  t o  F i n d  a  D i n o s a u r 
 
(a) Black-breasted hill turtle (Geoemyda spengleri)
. Figure 34.29 Extant reptiles (other than birds).
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   790 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 792 ===

in fishing nets, as well as by the residential and commercial 
development of the beaches where the turtles lay their eggs.
Lepidosaurs
One surviving lineage of lepidosaurs is represented by a single 
species, a lizard-like reptile called the tuatara (Figure 34.29b). 
Fossil evidence indicates that tuatara ancestors lived at least 220 
million years ago. These organisms thrived on many continents 
well into the Cretaceous period and reached up to a meter in 
length. Today, however, tuataras are found only on 30 islands off 
the coast of New Zealand. When humans arrived in New Zealand 
750 years ago, the rats that accompanied them devoured tuatara 
eggs, eventually eliminating the reptiles on the main islands. 
The tuataras that remain on the outlying islands are about 50 cm 
long and feed on insects, small lizards, and bird eggs and chicks. 
They can live to be over 100 years old. Their future survival 
depends on whether their remaining habitats are kept rat-free.
The other major living lineage of lepidosaurs consists of 
the lizards and snakes, or squamates, which number 10,425 
species (Figure 34.29c and d). Many squamates are small; the 
Jaragua lizard, discovered recently in the Dominican Republic, 
is only 16 mm long—small 
enough to fit comfortably on a 
dime. In contrast, the Komodo 
dragon of Indonesia is a lizard 
the course of evolution. Moreover, recent phylogenomic 
studies indicate that turtles are nested within the diapsid 
clade and are more closely related to crocodilians and birds 
than to other reptiles (see Figure 34.25).
All turtles have a boxlike shell made of upper and lower 
shields that are fused to the vertebrae, clavicles (collarbones), 
and ribs (Figure 34.29a). Most of the 351 known species of 
turtles have a hard shell, providing excellent defense against 
predators. Fossil evidence shows that Pappochelys, a turtle that 
lived 240 million years ago, had a series of hard, shell-like 
bones along its belly. By 220 million years ago, another early 
turtle had a complete lower shell but an incomplete upper 
shell, suggesting that turtles acquired full shells in stages.
The earliest turtles could not retract their head into their 
shell, but mechanisms for doing so evolved independently in 
two separate branches of turtles. The side-necked turtles fold 
their neck horizontally, while the vertical-necked turtles fold 
their neck vertically.
Some turtles have adapted to deserts, and others live 
almost entirely in ponds and rivers. Still others live in the sea. 
Sea turtles have a reduced shell and enlarged forelimbs that 
function as flippers. They include the largest living 
turtles, the deep-diving leatherbacks, which can exceed 
a mass of 1,500 kg and feed on jellies. Leatherbacks 
and other sea turtles are endangered by being caught 
(e) American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) 
(b) Tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus)
(d)Wagler’s pit viper 
(Tropidolaemus wagleri)
(c) Australian thorny devil lizard 
(Moloch horridus)
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   791 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 793 ===

792 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
fan odors toward olfactory (smell) organs on the roof of the 
mouth. Loosely articulated jawbones and elastic skin enable 
most snakes to swallow prey larger than the diameter of the 
snake’s head (see Figure 23.14).
Next, we’ll turn to the third (and final) clade of reptiles 
with living members, the archosaurs. There are two extant 
groups of archosaurs: the crocodilians and the birds.
Crocodilians
Alligators and crocodiles (collectively called crocodilians) 
belong to a lineage that reaches back to the late Triassic. The ear-
liest members of this lineage were small terrestrial quadrupeds 
with long, slender legs. Later species became larger and adapted 
to aquatic habitats, breathing air through their upturned nos-
trils. Some Mesozoic crocodilians grew as long as 12 m and may 
have attacked dinosaurs and other prey at the water’s edge.
The 24 known species of living crocodilians are confined 
to warm regions of the globe. In the southeastern United 
States, the American alligator (Figure 34.29e) has made a 
comeback after spending years on the endangered species list.
Birds
There are about 10,000 species of birds in the world. Like 
crocodilians, birds are archosaurs, but almost every feature 
of their anatomy has been modified in their adaptation to 
flight (Figure 34.30).
Derived Characters of Birds Many of the characters 
of birds are adaptations that facilitate flight, including 
that can reach a length of 3 m. It hunts deer and other large 
prey, delivering venom with its bite.
Snakes descended from lizards with legs (see Figure 22.1); 
thus they are classified as legless lizards. Today, some species 
of snakes retain vestigial pelvic and limb bones, providing 
evidence of their ancestry. Despite their lack of legs, snakes 
are quite proficient at moving on land, most often by produc-
ing waves of lateral bending that pass from head to tail. Force 
exerted by the bends against solid objects pushes the snake 
forward. Snakes can also move by gripping the ground with 
their belly scales at several points along the body while the 
scales at intervening points are lifted slightly off the ground 
and pulled forward.
Snakes are carnivorous, and a number of adaptations aid 
them in hunting and eating prey. They have acute chemical 
sensors, and though they lack eardrums, they are sensitive 
to ground vibrations, which helps them detect the move-
ments of prey. Heat-detecting organs between the eyes and 
nostrils of pit vipers, including rattlesnakes, are sensitive to 
minute temperature changes, enabling these night hunt-
ers to locate warm animals. Venomous snakes inject their 
toxin through a pair of sharp teeth that may be hollow or 
grooved. The flicking tongue is not venomous but helps 
Shaft
Vane
(c) Feather structure
(a) Wing
Forearm
Wrist
Finger 1
Finger 2
Finger 3
Palm
(b) Bone structure
Shaft
Vane
Barb
Hook
b Figure 34.30 Form fits function: the avian 
wing and feather. (a) A wing is a remodeled 
version of the tetrapod forelimb. (b) The bones 
of many birds have a honeycombed internal 
structure and are filled with air. (c) A feather 
consists of a central air-filled shaft, from which 
radiate the vanes. The vanes are made up of 
barbs, which bear small branches called barbules. 
Birds have contour feathers and downy feathers. 
Contour feathers are stiff and contribute to the 
aerodynamic shapes of the wings and body. Their 
barbules have hooks that cling to barbules on 
neighboring barbs. When a bird preens, it runs the 
length of each contour feather through its beak, 
engaging the hooks and uniting the barbs into a 
precise shape. Downy feathers lack hooks, and the 
free-form arrangement of their barbs produces a 
fluffiness that provides insulation by trapping air.
 Mastering Biology Video: Soaring Hawk
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   792 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 794 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 793
Toothed beak
Wing claw
Long tail
with many
vertebraeAirfoil wing
with contour
feathers
. Figure 34.31 Artist’s reconstruction of the early bird 
Archaeopteryx. Fossil evidence indicates that Archaeopteryx was 
capable of powered flight but retained many characters of nonbird 
dinosaurs. Colors in this drawing were based on pigments extracted 
from fossilized Archaeopteryx feathers.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: Great Transitions:  
The Origin of Birds  
weight-saving modifications that make flying more ef-
ficient. For example, birds lack a urinary bladder, and the 
females of most species have only one ovary. The gonads of 
both females and males are usually small, except during the 
breeding season, when they increase in size. Living birds 
are also toothless, an adaptation that trims the weight of 
the head.
A bird’s most obvious adaptations for flight are its wings 
and feathers (see Figure 34.30). Feathers are made of the 
protein b-keratin, which is also found in the scales of other 
reptiles. The shape and arrangement of the feathers form the 
wings into airfoils, and they illustrate some of the same prin-
ciples of aerodynamics as the wings of an airplane. Power for 
flapping the wings comes from contractions of large pectoral 
(breast) muscles anchored to a keel on the sternum (breast-
bone). Some birds, such as eagles and hawks, have wings 
adapted for soaring on air currents and flap their wings only 
occasionally; other birds, including hummingbirds, must 
flap continuously to stay aloft (see Figure 34.34). Among the 
fastest birds are the appropriately named swifts, which can 
fly at speeds up to 170 km/hr.
Flight provides numerous benefits. It enhances scaveng-
ing and hunting, including enabling many birds to feed on 
flying insects, an abundant, nutritious food resource. Flight 
also provides ready escape from earthbound predators and 
enables some birds to migrate great distances to exploit dif-
ferent food resources and seasonal breeding areas.
Flying requires a great expenditure of energy from an 
active metabolism. Birds are endothermic; they use their own 
metabolic heat to maintain a high, constant body tempera-
ture. Feathers and in some species a layer of fat provide insu-
lation that enables birds to retain body heat. The lungs have 
tiny tubes leading to and from elastic air sacs that improve 
airflow and oxygen uptake. This efficient respiratory system 
and a circulatory system with a four-chambered heart keep 
tissues well supplied with oxygen and nutrients, supporting a 
high rate of metabolism.
Flight also requires both acute vision and fine muscle con-
trol. Birds have color vision and excellent eyesight. The visual 
and motor areas of the brain are well developed, and the 
brain is proportionately larger than those of amphibians and 
nonbird reptiles.
Birds generally display very complex behaviors, particu-
larly during breeding season, when they engage in elaborate 
courtship rituals. Because eggs have shells by the time they 
are laid, fertilization must be internal. Copulation usually 
involves contact between the openings to the birds’ cloacas. 
After eggs are laid, the avian embryo must be kept warm 
through brooding by the mother, the father, or both, depend-
ing on the species.
The Origin of Birds Cladistic analyses of birds and reptil-
ian fossils indicate that birds belong to the group of bipedal 
saurischian dinosaurs called theropods. Since the late 1990s, 
Chinese paleontologists have unearthed a spectacular trove 
of feathered theropod fossils that are shedding light on the 
origin of birds. Several species of dinosaurs closely related to 
birds had feathers with vanes, and a wider range of species 
had filamentous feathers. Such findings imply that feathers 
evolved long before powered flight. Among the possible func-
tions of these early feathers were insulation, camouflage, and 
courtship display.
By about 160 million years ago, a lineage of feathered 
theropods had evolved into birds. Many researchers con-
sider Archaeopteryx, which was discovered in a German 
limestone quarry in 1861, to be the earliest known bird 
(Figure 34.31). It had feathered wings but retained ancestral 
characters such as teeth, clawed digits in its wings, and a 
long tail. Archaeopteryx flew well at high speeds, but unlike a 
present-day bird, it could not take off from a standing posi-
tion. Fossils of later birds from the Cretaceous show a gradual 
loss of certain ancestral dinosaur features, such as teeth and 
clawed forelimbs, as well as the acquisition of innovations 
found in extant birds, including a short tail covered by a fan 
of feathers.
Living Birds Clear evidence of Neornithes, the clade that 
includes the 28 orders of living birds, can be found before 
the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary 66 million years ago. 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   793 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 795 ===

794 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Several groups of living and extinct birds include one or 
more flightless species. The ratites, an order of birds that 
includes the ostrich, rhea, kiwi, cassowary, and emu, are 
all flightless (Figure 34.32). In ratites, the sternal keel is ab-
sent, and the pectoral muscles are small relative to those of 
birds that can fly.
Penguins make up another flightless order of birds, but, 
like flying birds, they have powerful pectoral muscles. They 
use these muscles to “fly” in the water: As they swim, they 
flap their flipper-like wings in a manner that resembles the 
flight stroke of a more typical bird (Figure 34.33). Certain spe-
cies of rails, ducks, and pigeons are also flightless.
Although the demands of flight have rendered the 
general body forms of many flying birds similar to one 
another, experienced bird-watchers can distinguish spe-
cies by their profile, colors, flying style, behavior, and 
beak shape. The skeleton of a hummingbird’s wing is 
. Figure 34.32 A kiwi (Apteryx), a flightless bird native 
to New Zealand.
. Figure 34.33 A king penguin (Aptenodytes patagonicus) 
“flying” underwater. With their streamlined shape and powerful 
pectoral muscles, penguins are fast and agile swimmers.
. Figure 34.34 Hummingbird feeding while hovering. A 
hummingbird can rotate its wings in all directions, enabling it to 
hover and fly backward.
. Figure 34.35 A specialized beak. This American flamingo 
(Phoenicopterus ruber) dips its beak into the water and strains out 
the food.
unique, making it the only bird that can hover and fly 
backward (Figure 34.34). Adult birds lack teeth, but dur-
ing the course of avian evolution their beaks have taken 
on a variety of shapes suited to different diets. Some birds, 
such as parrots, have crushing beaks with which they 
can crack open hard nuts and seeds. Other birds, such as 
flamingoes, are filter feeders. Their beaks have “strain-
ers” that enable them to capture food particles from the 
water (Figure 34.35). Foot structure, too, shows consider-
able variation. Various birds use their feet for perching on 
branches (Figure 34.36), grasping food, defense, swim-
ming or walking, and even courtship (see Figure 24.3e).
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   794 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 796 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 795
. Figure 34.36 Feet adapted to perching. This great tit 
(Parus major) is a member of the Passeriformes, the perching birds. 
The toes of these birds can lock around a branch or wire, enabling 
the bird to rest for long periods.
1. Describe three key amniote adaptations for life on land.
2. Are snakes tetrapods? Explain.
3. Identify four avian adaptations for flight.
4. VISUAL SKILLS Based on the phylogeny shown in Figure 
34.25, identify the sister group for (a) reptiles, (b) squamates, 
and (c) the clade that includes crocodilians and birds.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.5
CONCEPT 34.6
Mammals are amniotes that have 
hair and produce milk
Cephalochordata
Urochordata
Myxini
Petromyzontida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygii
Actinistia
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Reptilia
Mammalia
The reptiles we have been 
discussing represent one of 
the two living lineages of 
amniotes. The other amniote 
lineage is our own, the 
mammals. Today, there 
are about 6,400 known 
species of mammals 
on Earth.
Derived Characters of Mammals
Mammals are named for their distinctive mammary glands, 
which produce milk for offspring. All mammalian moth-
ers nourish their young with milk, a balanced diet rich in 
fats, sugars, proteins, minerals, and vitamins. Hair, another 
mammalian character, and a fat layer under the skin pro-
vide insulation that can conserve water and protect the 
body against extremes of heat or cold. Another mammalian 
adaptation for life on land is the kidney (see Figure 44.13), 
which is efficient at conserving water when removing 
wastes from the body. Some mammals, such as kangaroo 
rats, are so adept at conserving water that they can survive 
     5
     The kangaroo rat’s
thick, oily skin limits
evaporative water loss.
1
     A kangaroo rat rarely 
drinks: It obtains nearly 
all of the water it needs 
from catabolic pathways
and from moisture 
in food.
4
2     The animal stays in its cool, relatively 
humid burrow during the heat of the day, 
emerging at night to forage.
     The large surface 
area of its nasal 
passages increases 
tJe efƂcienc[ of 
water reabsorption 
when the animal 
exhales.
3
     The large intestine and kidney
absorb water so effectively that
little water is lost in feces and urine.
. Figure 34.37 Adaptations of the kangaroo rat to its 
extremely dry habitat.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how the catabolic pathways mentioned 
in 4 could provide a kangaroo rat with water. (See Concept 10.1.)
in arid environments while drinking little or no water at 
all (Figure 34.37).
Like birds, mammals are endothermic, and most have a 
high metabolic rate. Efficient respiratory and circulatory sys-
tems (including a four-chambered heart) support a mammal’s 
metabolism. Also as in birds, mammals generally have a larger 
brain than other vertebrates of equivalent size, and many 
species are capable learners. The relatively long duration of 
parental care extends the time for offspring to learn impor-
tant survival skills by observing their parents. In addition, 
whereas the teeth of reptiles are generally uniform in size 
and shape, the jaws of mammals typically bear a variety of 
teeth with sizes and shapes adapted for chewing many kinds 
of foods. Humans, like most mammals, have teeth modified 
for shearing (incisors and canine teeth) and for crushing and 
grinding (premolars and molars).
Early Evolution of Mammals
Mammals belong to a group of amniotes known as 
synapsids. Early nonmammalian synapsids lacked hair, had 
a sprawling gait, and laid eggs. A distinctive characteristic 
of synapsids is the single temporal fenestra, a hole behind 
the eye socket on each side of the skull. Humans retain this 
feature; your jaw muscles pass through the temporal fenestra 
and anchor on your temple. Fossil evidence shows that the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   795 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 797 ===

796 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
lineages. A diverse set of mammal species coexisted with 
dinosaurs in the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, but most of 
these species were small, measuring less than 1 m in length. 
One factor that may have contributed to their small size is 
that dinosaurs already occupied many ecological niches of 
large-bodied animals.
Fossil and molecular evidence indicate that by 160 
million years ago, the three major lineages of mammals 
had emerged: those leading to monotremes (egg-laying 
mammals), marsupials (mammals with a pouch), and euthe-
rians (placental mammals). After the extinction of large 
dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and marine reptiles during the late 
Cretaceous period, mammals underwent an adaptive radia-
tion, giving rise to large predators and herbivores as well as 
flying and aquatic species.
Monotremes
Monotremes are found only in Australia and New 
Guinea and are represented by one species of platypus and 
four species of echidnas (spiny anteaters; Figure 34.39). 
Monotremes lay eggs, a character that is ancestral for 
amniotes and retained in most reptiles. Like all mam-
mals, monotremes have hair and produce milk, but they 
lack nipples. Milk is secreted by glands on the belly of the 
mother. After hatching, the baby sucks the milk from the 
mother’s fur.
jaw was remodeled as mammalian features arose gradually in 
successive lineages of earlier synapsids (see Figure 25.7); in all, 
these changes took more than 100 million years. In addition, 
two of the bones that formerly made up the jaw joint (the 
quadrate and the articular) were incorporated into the mam-
malian middle ear (Figure 34.38). This evolutionary change 
is reflected in changes that occur during development. For 
example, as a mammalian embryo grows, the posterior region 
of its jaw—which in a reptile forms the articular bone—can be 
observed to detach from the jaw and migrate to the ear, where 
it forms the malleus.
Synapsids evolved into large herbivores and carni-
vores during the Permian period (299–252 million years 
ago), and for a time they were the dominant tetrapods. 
However, the Permian-Triassic extinctions took a heavy 
toll on them, and their diversity fell during the Triassic 
(252–201 million years ago). Increasingly mammal-like 
synapsids emerged by the end of the Triassic. While not 
true mammals, these synapsids had acquired a number 
of the derived characters that distinguish mammals from 
other amniotes. They were small and probably hairy, and 
they likely fed on insects at night. Their bones show that 
they grew faster than other synapsids, suggesting that they 
probably had a relatively high metabolic rate; however, 
they still laid eggs.
During the Jurassic (201–145 million years ago), the first 
true mammals arose and diversified into many short-lived 
MAKE CONNECTIONS Review the definition 
of exaptation in Concept 25.6. Summarize the 
process by which exaptation occurs and explain 
how the incorporation of the articular and 
quadrate bones into the mammalian inner ear 
is an example.
Key
Sound
Eardrum Middle ear
Inner ear
Present-day reptile Present-day mammal
Stapes
Incus (quadrate)
Malleus (articular)
Sound
Stapes Inner earEardrum
Middle ear
(a) 
Biarmosuchus,
an extinct 
synapsid
Jaw joint
Temporal
fenestra
In Biarmosuchus, the meeting of the articular and quadrate bones formed the jaw joint.
(b) During the evolutionary remodeling of the mammalian skull, a new jaw joint formed 
between the dentary and squamosal bones (see Figure 25.7). No longer used in the 
jaw, the quadrate and articular bones became incorporated into the middle ear as two 
of the three bones that transmit sound from the eardrum to the inner ear.
Dentary
Squamosal
Articular
Quadrate
c Figure 34.38 The evolution of the 
mammalian ear bones. Biarmosuchus was a 
synapsid, a lineage that eventually gave rise to 
the mammals. Bones that transmit sound in the 
ear of mammals arose from the modification of 
bones in the jaw of nonmammalian synapsids.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   796 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 798 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 797
. Figure 34.39 Short-beaked echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus), 
an Australian monotreme. Monotremes have hair and produce 
milk, but they lack nipples. Monotremes are the only mammals that 
lay eggs (inset).
(a) A young brushtail possum (Australia). The offspring of marsupials are 
born very early in their development. They finish their growth while 
nursing from a nipple (in their mother’s pouch in most species).
(b)A greater bilby (Australia). The greater bilby is a digger and burrower 
that eats termites and other insects, along with the seeds, roots, and 
bulbs of various plants. The female‘s rear-opening pouch helps 
protect the young from dirt as the mother digs. Other marsupials, 
such as kangaroos, have a pouch that opens to the front.
(c)Virginia opossum (Central and North America). This species is the 
only marsupial found north of Mexico. After the young complete 
development in the mother's pouch, they spend another four to five 
months riding on her back before living independently.
. Figure 34.40 Marsupials in Australia and North America.
Marsupials
Opossums, kangaroos, and koalas are examples of the group 
called marsupials. Both marsupials and eutherians share 
derived characters not found among monotremes. They have 
higher metabolic rates and nipples that provide milk, and 
they give birth to live young. The embryo begins develop-
ment inside the uterus of the female’s reproductive tract. The 
lining of the uterus and the extraembryonic membranes that 
arise from the embryo form a placenta, a structure in which 
nutrients diffuse into the embryo from the mother’s blood.
A marsupial is born very early in its development 
and completes its embryonic development while nurs-
ing (Figure 34.40a). In most species, the nursing young are 
held within a maternal pouch called a marsupium. A red 
kangaroo, for instance, is about the size of a honeybee at its 
birth, just 33 days after fertilization. Its back legs are merely 
buds, but its front legs are strong enough for it to crawl from 
the exit of its mother’s reproductive tract to a pouch that 
opens to the front of her body, a journey that lasts a few min-
utes. In other species, the marsupium opens to the rear of the 
mother’s body; in greater bilbies, this protects the young as 
their mother burrows in the dirt (Figure 34.40b).
Marsupials existed worldwide during the Mesozoic era, 
but today they are found only in the Australian region 
and in the Americas (Figure 34.40c). The biogeography of 
marsupials illustrates the interplay between biological and 
geologic evolution (see Concept 25.4). After the breakup of 
the supercontinent Pangaea, South America and Australia 
became island continents, and their marsupials diversi-
fied in isolation from the eutherians that began an adap-
tive radiation on the northern continents. Australia has 
not been in contact with another continent since early in 
the Cenozoic era, 66 million years ago. In Australia, con-
vergent evolution has resulted in a diversity of marsupials 
that resemble eutherians in similar ecological roles in other 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   797 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 799 ===

798 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
Marsupial mammals Eutherian mammals
Plantigale
Marsupial mole Mole
Deer mouse
Flying squirrel
Woodchuck
Wombat
Sugar glider
Tasmanian devil
Kangaroo Patagonian cavy
Wolverine
. Figure 34.41 Convergent evolution of marsupials and 
eutherians (placental mammals). (Drawings not to scale.)
parts of the world (Figure 34.41). In contrast, although 
South America had a diverse marsupial fauna throughout 
the Paleogene, it has experienced several immigrations 
of eutherians. One of the most important occurred about 
3 million years ago, when North and South America joined 
at the Panamanian isthmus and extensive two-way traf-
fic of animals took place over the land bridge. Today, only 
three families of marsupials live outside the Australian 
region, and the only marsupials found in the wild in North 
America are a few species of opossum.
Eutherians (Placental Mammals)
Eutherians are commonly called placental mammals 
because their placentas are more complex than those of mar-
supials. Eutherians have a longer pregnancy than marsupials. 
Young eutherians complete their embryonic development 
within the uterus, joined to their mother by the placenta. 
The eutherian placenta provides an intimate and long-lasting 
association between the mother and her developing young.
The major groups of living eutherians are thought to have 
diverged from one another in a burst of evolutionary change. 
The timing of this burst is uncertain: Molecular data suggest 
it occurred about 100 million years ago, while morphological 
data suggest it was about 60 million years ago. Figure 34.42 
explores several major eutherian orders and their phyloge-
netic relationships with each other as well as with the mono-
tremes and marsupials.
Primates
The mammalian order Primates includes the lemurs, 
tarsiers, monkeys, and apes. Humans are members of 
the ape group.
Derived Characters of Primates Most primates have hands 
and feet adapted for grasping, and their digits have flat nails 
instead of the narrow claws of other mammals. There are other 
characteristic features of the hands and feet, too, such as skin 
ridges on the fingers (which account for human fingerprints). 
Relative to other mammals, primates have a large brain and 
short jaws, giving them a flat face. Their forward-looking eyes are 
close together on the front of the face. Primates also exhibit rela-
tively well-developed parental care and complex social behavior.
The earliest known primates were tree-dwellers, and 
many of the characteristics of primates are adaptations to 
the demands of living in the trees. Grasping hands and feet 
allow primates to hang onto tree branches. All living primates 
except humans have a big toe that is widely separated from 
the other toes, enabling them to grasp branches with their 
feet. All primates also have a thumb that is relatively movable 
and separate from the fingers, but monkeys and apes have a 
fully opposable thumb; that is, they can touch the ventral 
surface (fingerprint side) of the tip of all four fingers with the 
ventral surface of the thumb of the same hand. In monkeys 
and apes other than humans, the opposable thumb functions 
in a grasping “power grip.” In humans, a distinctive bone 
structure at the base of the thumb allows it to be used for 
more precise manipulation. The unique dexterity of humans 
represents descent with modification from our tree-dwelling 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   798 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 800 ===

. Figure 34.42 Exploring Mammalian Diversity
One hypothesis for the evolutionary relationships of mammals, 
represented by the tree shown here, clusters the eutherian orders 
into four main clades. All 20 extant orders of mammals are listed; 
the orders in bold type are surveyed in more detail around the tree.
Xenarthra (sloths, anteaters, armadillos)
Reduced teeth or no teeth;
herbivorous (sloths)
or carnivorous (anteaters, armadillos) 
Lagomorpha (rabbits, hares, picas)
Chisel-like incisors; hind legs longer
than forelegs and adapted for
running and jumping; herbivorous
Carnivora (dogs, wolves,
bears, cats, weasels, otters,
seals, walruses)
Sharp, pointed canine teeth
and molars for grasping and
cutting; carnivorous
Cetartiodactyla
•Artiodactyls
(sheep, pigs, cattle, deer, giraffes)
Hooves with an even number
of toes on each foot; herbivorous 
•Cetaceans
(whales, dolphins, porpoises)
Aquatic; streamlined body; paddle-like
forelimbs and no hind limbs; thick layer
of insulating blubber;  carnivorous 
Rodentia (squirrels, beavers, rats,
porcupines, mice)
Chisel-like, continuously growing
incisors worn down by gnawing;
herbivorous
Primates (lemurs, monkeys,
chimpanzees, gorillas, humans)
Opposable thumbs; forward-facing eyes; 
well-developed cerebral cortex; omnivorous
Perissodactyla (horses, zebras,
tapirs, rhinoceroses)
Hooves with an odd
number of toes on each foot;
herbivorous
Chiroptera (bats)
Adapted for ﬂight; broad skinfold that 
extends from elongated ﬁngers to body
and legs; carnivorous or herbivorous
Anteater
Jackrabbit
Red
squirrel
Golden lion
tamarin 
Indian rhinoceros
Frog-eating 
bat
Coyote
Bighorn
sheep
2CEiƂE
white-sided
porpoise
Monotremata
(platypuses, echidnas)
Lay eggs; no nipples; young
suck milk from fur of mother Echidna
Marsupialia
(kangaroos, opossums, koalas)
Complete embryonic development
in pouch on mother’s body Koala
Proboscidea (elephants)
Long, muscular trunk; thick,
loose skin; upper incisors
elongated as tusks
African
elephant
Sirenia (manatees, dugongs)
Aquatic; ﬁnlike forelimbs
and no hind limbs;
herbivorous 
Manatee
Hyracoidea (hyraxes)
Short legs; stumpy tail; herbivorous;
complex, multi-chambered stomach
Rock
hyrax
ANCESTRAL
SYNAPSID
Carnivora
Perissodactyla
Cetartiodactyla
Chiroptera
Eulipotyphla
Pholidota (pangolins)
Rodentia
Lagomorpha
Primates
Dermoptera (flying lemurs)
Scandentia (tree shrews) 
Proboscidea
Sirenia
Hyracoidea
Tubulidentata 
Afrosoricida (golden moles 
and tenrecs)
Macroscelidea (elephant
shrews) 
Xenarthra
Marsupialia
Monotremata
Monotremes
(5 species)
Marsupials
(366 species)
Eutherians
(6,028 species)
180 million
years ago (mya)
160 mya
 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 799
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   799 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 801 ===

800 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
ancestors. Arboreal maneuvering also 
requires excellent eye-hand coordina-
tion. The overlapping visual fields of 
the two forward-facing eyes enhance 
depth perception, an obvious advan-
tage when brachiating (traveling by 
swinging from branch to branch in 
trees).
Living Primates There are three 
main groups of living primates: (1) the 
lemurs of Madagascar (Figure 34.43) 
and the lorises and bush babies of 
tropical Africa and southern Asia; 
(2) the tarsiers, which live in southeast-
ern Asia; and (3) the anthropoids, 
which include monkeys and apes 
and are found worldwide. The first 
group—lemurs, lorises, and bush 
babies—probably resemble early arbo-
real primates. The oldest known tarsier 
fossils date to 55 million years ago; 
along with DNA evidence, these fossils 
indicate that tarsiers are more closely 
related to anthropoids than to the 
lemur group (Figure 34.44).
You can see in Figure 34.44 that 
monkeys do not form a clade but 
rather consist of two groups, the 
New and Old World monkeys. Both 
of these groups are thought to have 
originated in Africa or Asia. The fossil 
record indicates that New World mon-
keys first colonized South America 
roughly 25 million years ago. By that 
time, South America and Africa had 
drifted apart, and monkeys may have 
b Figure 34.43  
Verreaux’s 
sifakas 
(Propithecus 
verreauxi), a type 
of lemur.
Lemurs, lorises, 
and bush babies
Anthropoids
Tarsiers
New World monkeys
Old World monkeys
Gibbons
Orangutans
Gorillas
Chimpanzees
and bonobos
0 10 20 30
Time (millions of years ago)
40 50 60 70
ANCESTRAL
PRIMATE
Humans and
extinct Homo
species
†Australopithecus
m Figure 34.44 A phylogenetic tree of primates. The fossil record indicates that the 
lineage leading to monkeys and apes diverged from other primates 55 million years ago. The 
lineage leading to humans and Australopithecus branched off from other apes about 8 million 
years ago; the dagger symbol (†) denotes an extinct group.
VISUAL SKILLS Is the phylogeny shown here consistent with the idea that humans evolved from 
chimpanzees? Explain.
reached South America from Africa by rafting on logs or 
other debris. What is certain is that New World monkeys 
and Old World monkeys underwent separate adaptive 
radiations during their many millions of years of separation 
(Figure 34.45). All species of New World monkeys are arbo-
real, whereas Old World monkeys include ground-dwelling 
as well as arboreal species. Most monkeys in both groups 
are diurnal (active during the day) and usually live in bands 
held together by social behavior.
The other group of anthropoids consists of primates 
informally called apes (Figure 34.46). The ape group 
includes four genera of gibbons, along with the so-called 
“great apes,” the genera Pongo (orangutans), Gorilla 
(gorillas), Pan (chimpanzees and bonobos), and Homo 
(humans). The apes diverged from Old World monkeys 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   800 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 802 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 801
 Mastering Biology V i d e o s :  
Chimp Cracking Nut •  
Gibbons Brachiating
(a)  Gibbons (18 species), 
such as this Muller’s 
gibbon, are found only 
in south-eastern Asia. 
Their very long arms 
and fingers are 
adaptations for 
brachiating (swinging 
by the arms from 
branch to branch).
(b)  Orangutans (3 species) are shy apes that live in the 
rain forests of Sumatra and Borneo. Named in 2017, 
this species (Pongo tapanuliensis) is the first great 
ape discovered in nearly 100 years.
(c)  Gorillas (2 species) are the 
largest apes; some males 
are almost 2 m tall and 
weigh about 200 kg. 
Found only in Africa, 
these herbivores usually 
live in groups of up to 
about 20 individuals.
(d)  Chimpanzees live in tropical Africa. They feed 
and sleep in trees but also spend a great deal of 
time on the ground. Chimpanzees are intelligent, 
communicative, and social. 
(e)  Bonobos are in the same genus (Pan) as 
chimpanzees but are smaller. They survive today 
only in the African nation of Congo.
. Figure 34.46 Nonhuman apes.
(a) New World monkeys, such 
as spider monkeys (shown 
here), squirrel monkeys, and 
capuchins, have a prehensile 
tail (one adapted for 
grasping) and nostrils that 
open to the sides.
(b) Old World monkeys lack 
a prehensile tail, and their 
nostrils open downward. 
This group includes 
macaques (shown here), 
mandrils, baboons, and 
rhesus monkeys.
m Figure 34.45 New World monkeys and Old World monkeys.
about 25–30 million years ago. Today, nonhuman apes are 
found exclusively in tropical regions of the Old World. With 
the exception of gibbons, living apes are larger than either 
New or Old World monkeys. All living apes have relatively 
long arms, short legs, and no tail. Although all nonhuman 
apes spend time in trees, only gibbons and orangutans are 
primarily arboreal. Social organization varies among the 
apes; gorillas and chimpanzees are highly social. Finally, 
compared to other primates, apes have a larger brain in pro-
portion to their body size, and their behavior is more flex-
ible. These two characteristics are especially prominent in 
our next group, the hominins.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.6
1. Contrast monotremes, marsupials, and eutherians in terms 
of how they bear young.
2. Identify at least five derived traits of primates.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Develop a hypothesis to explain why 
the diversity of mammals increased in the Cenozoic. Your 
explanation should consider mammalian adaptations as 
well as factors such as mass extinctions and continental drift 
(review Concept 25.4).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   801 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 803 ===

802 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
identical, a difference of 1% can represent many changes in a 
genome with 3 billion base pairs. Furthermore, changes in a 
small number of genes can have large effects. This point was 
highlighted by recent results showing that humans and chim-
panzees differ in the expression of 19 regulatory genes. These 
genes turn other genes on and off and hence may account for 
many differences between humans and chimpanzees.
Bear in mind that such genomic differences—and what-
ever derived phenotypic traits they encode—separate humans 
from other living apes. But many of these new characters 
first emerged in our ancestors, long before our own species 
appeared. We will consider some of these ancestors to see 
how these characters originated.
The Earliest Hominins
The study of human origins is known as paleoanthropology. 
Paleoanthropologists have unearthed fossils of approximately 
25 extinct species that are more closely related to humans 
than to chimpanzees. These species are known as hominins 
(Figure 34.47). Since 1994, fossils of four hominin species 
Humans are mammals that 
have a large brain and bipedal 
locomotion
In our tour of Earth’s biodiversity, we turn now to our own 
species, Homo sapiens, which is about 200,000 years old. 
When you consider that life has existed on Earth for at least 
3.5 billion years, we are clearly evolutionary newcomers.
Derived Characters of Humans
Many characters distinguish humans from other apes. Most 
obviously, humans stand upright and are bipedal (walk on two 
legs). Humans have a much larger brain and are capable of lan-
guage, symbolic thought, artistic expression, and the manu-
facture and use of complex tools. Humans also have reduced 
jawbones and jaw muscles, along with a shorter digestive tract.
At the molecular level, the list of derived characters of 
humans is growing as scientists compare the human and 
chimpanzee genomes. Although the two genomes are 99% 
CONCEPT 34.7
Orrorin tugenensis
Sahelanthropus
tchadensis
Ardipithecus ramidus 
Australopithecus
afarensis
Homo
rudolfensisHomo
habilis
Homo erectus
Australopithecus
anamensis
Kenyanthropus
platyops
Australopithecus
africanus
Australopithecus
garhi
Paranthropus
boisei
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
3.0Millions of years ago
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Paranthropus
robustus
Homo
ergaster
Homo
neanderthalensis
Homo
sapiens
?
m Figure 34.47 A timeline for selected hominin species. 
Most of the fossils illustrated here come from sites in eastern and 
southern Africa. Note that at most times in hominin history, two 
or more hominin species were contemporaries.
  Mastering Biology HHMI Video:  
Great Transitions: The Origin of Humans 
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   802 3/21/20   3:25 AM

=== SIDE 804 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 803
error is often illustrated as a parade of fossil species that 
become progressively more like ourselves as they march 
across the page. If human evolution is a parade, it is a very 
disorderly one, with many groups breaking away to wander 
other evolutionary paths. At times, several hominin species 
coexisted. These species often differed in skull shape, body 
size, and diet (as inferred from their teeth). Ultimately, all 
but one lineage—the one that gave rise to Homo sapiens—
ended in extinction. Overall, considering the characteristics 
of all hominins that lived over the past 6.5 million years, 
H. sapiens appears not as the end result of a straight evolu-
tionary path, but rather as the only surviving member of a 
highly branched evolutionary tree.
Australopiths
The fossil record indicates that hominin diversity increased 
dramatically between 4 and 2 million years ago. Many of the 
hominins from this period are collectively called australo-
piths. Their phylogeny remains unresolved on many points, 
but as a group, they are almost certainly paraphyletic. The 
earliest member of the group, Australopithecus anamensis, 
lived 4.2–3.9 million years ago, close in time to older homi-
nins such as Ardipithecus ramidus.
Australopiths got their name from the 1924 discovery 
in South Africa of Australopithecus africanus (“southern ape 
of Africa”), which lived between 3 and 2.4 million years 
ago. With the discovery of more fossils, it became clear that 
A. africanus walked fully erect (was bipedal) and had human-
like hands and teeth. However, its brain was only about one-
third the size of the brain of a present-day human.
In 1974, in the Afar region of Ethiopia, scientists discov-
ered a 3.2-million-year-old Australopithecus skeleton that 
was 40% complete. “Lucy,” as the fossil was named, was 
short—only about 1 m tall. Lucy and similar fossils have been 
given the species name Australopithecus afarensis (for the Afar 
region). Fossil evidence shows that A. afarensis existed as a 
species for at least 1 million years.
At the risk of oversimplifying, we could say that A. afarensis 
had fewer of the derived characters of humans above the 
neck than below. Lucy’s brain was the size of a softball, a size 
similar to that expected for a chimpanzee of Lucy’s body size. 
A. afarensis skulls also have a long lower jaw. Skeletons of 
A. afarensis suggest that these hominins were capable of arbo-
real locomotion, with arms that were relatively long in propor-
tion to body size (compared to the proportions in humans). 
However, fragments of pelvic and skull bones indicate that 
A. afarensis walked on two legs. Fossilized footprints in Laetoli, 
Tanzania, corroborate the skeletal evidence that hominins liv-
ing at the time of A. afarensis were bipedal (Figure 34.49).
Another lineage of australopiths consisted of the “robust” 
australopiths. These hominins, which included species such 
as Paranthropus boisei, had sturdy skulls with powerful jaws 
dating to more than 4 million years ago have been discovered. 
The oldest of these hominins, Sahelanthropus tchadensis, lived 
about 6.5 million years ago.
Sahelanthropus and other early hominins shared some of 
the derived characters of humans. For example, they had 
reduced canine teeth, and some fossils suggest that they had 
relatively flat faces. They also show signs of having been 
more upright and bipedal than other apes. One clue to their 
upright stance can be found in the foramen magnum, the 
hole at the base of the skull through which the spinal cord 
passes. In chimpanzees, the foramen magnum is relatively far 
back on the skull, while in early hominins (and in humans), 
it is located underneath the skull. This position allows us 
to hold our head directly over our body, as early hominins 
apparently did as well. The pelvis, leg bones, and feet of the 
4.4-million-year-old Ardipithecus ramidus also suggest that 
early hominins were increasingly bipedal (Figure 34.48). (We 
will return to the subject of bipedalism later in the chapter.)
Note that the characters that distinguish humans from other 
living apes did not all evolve in tight unison. While early homi-
nins were showing signs of bipedalism, their brains remained 
small—about 300–450 cm3 in volume, compared with an aver-
age of 1,300 cm3 for Homo sapiens. The earliest hominins were 
also small overall. A. ramidus, 
for example, is estimated to 
have been about 1.2 m tall, 
with relatively large teeth and 
a jaw that projected beyond 
the upper part of the face. 
Humans, in contrast, aver-
age about 1.7 m in height 
and have a relatively flat face; 
compare your own face with 
that of the chimpanzees in 
Figure 34.46d.
It’s important to avoid two 
common misconceptions 
about early hominins. One 
is to think of them either as 
chimpanzees or as having 
evolved from chimpanzees. 
Chimpanzees represent the 
tip of a separate branch of 
evolution, and they acquired 
derived characters of their 
own after they diverged from 
their common ancestor with 
humans.
Another misconception 
is to think of human evo-
lution as a ladder leading 
directly from an ancestral 
ape to Homo sapiens. This 
. Figure 34.48 “Ardi,” a 
4.4-million-year-old fossil of 
Ardipithecus ramidus.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   803 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 805 ===

804 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
changed, natural selection may have favored adaptations that 
made moving over open ground more efficient. Underlying 
this idea is the fact that while nonhuman apes are superbly 
adapted for climbing trees, they are less well suited for ground 
travel. For example, as a chimpanzee walks, it uses four times 
the amount of energy used by a human.
Although elements of this hypothesis survive, the picture 
now appears more complex. Even though all fossils of early 
hominins show indications of bipedalism, none of these 
hominins lived in savannas. Instead, they lived in mixed hab-
itats ranging from forests to open woodlands. Furthermore, 
whatever the selective pressure that led to bipedalism, homi-
nins did not become more bipedal in a simple, linear fashion. 
Ardipithecus had skeletal elements indicating that it could 
switch to upright walking but also was well suited for climb-
ing trees. Australopiths seem to have had various locomotor 
styles, and some species spent more time on the ground than 
others. Only about 1.9 million years ago did hominins begin 
to walk long distances on two legs. These hominins lived in 
more arid environments, where bipedal walking requires less 
energy than walking on all fours.
Tool Use
As you read earlier, the manufacture and use of complex tools 
are derived behavioral characters of humans. Determining 
the origin of tool use in hominin evolution is very difficult. 
Other apes are capable of surprisingly sophisticated tool use. 
Orangutans, for example, can fashion sticks into probes for 
retrieving insects from their nests. Chimpanzees are even 
more adept, using rocks to smash open food and putting 
leaves on their feet to walk over thorns. It’s likely that early 
hominins were capable of this sort of simple tool use, but 
finding fossils of modified sticks or leaves that were used as 
shoes is practically impossible.
The oldest generally accepted evidence of tool use by hom-
inins is 2.5-million-year-old cut marks on animal bones found 
in Ethiopia. These marks suggest that hominins cut flesh from 
the bones of animals using stone tools. Interestingly, the 
hominins whose fossils were found near the site where the 
bones were discovered had a relatively small brain. If these 
hominins, which have been named Australopithecus garhi, 
were in fact the creators of the stone tools used on the bones, 
that would suggest that stone tool use originated before the 
evolution of large brains in hominins.
 Mastering Biology HHMI Video: The Tool-Making  
Animal 
Early Homo
The earliest fossils that paleoanthropologists place in our 
genus, Homo, include those of the species Homo habilis. These 
fossils, ranging in age from about 2.4 to 1.6 million years, 
show clear signs of certain derived hominin characters above 
and large teeth, adapted for grinding and chewing hard, 
tough foods. They contrast with the “gracile” (slender) aus-
tralopiths, including A. afarensis and A. africanus, which had 
lighter feeding equipment adapted for softer foods.
Combining evidence from the earliest hominins with the 
much richer fossil record of later australopiths makes it possi-
ble to formulate hypotheses about significant trends in hom-
inin evolution. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you’ll examine 
one such trend: how hominin brain volume has changed over 
time. Here we’ll consider two other trends: the emergence of 
bipedalism and tool use.
Bipedalism
Our anthropoid ancestors of 30–35 million years ago 
were still tree-dwellers. By about 10 million years ago, the 
Himalayan mountain range had formed, thrust up in the 
aftermath of the Indian plate’s collision with the Eurasian 
plate (see Figure 25.16). The climate became drier, and the 
forests of what are now Africa and Asia contracted. The result 
was an increased area of savanna (grassland) habitat, with 
fewer trees. Researchers have hypothesized that as the habitat 
An artist’s reconstruction 
of A. afarensis, a hominin 
alive at the time of the 
Laetoli footprints.
(a)The Laetoli footprints, 
more than 3.5 million 
years old, confirm that 
upright posture 
evolved quite early in 
hominin history.
(b)
c Figure 34.49 Evidence 
that hominins walked 
upright 3.5 million years 
ago.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   804 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 806 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 805
Fossils from 1.9 to 1.5 million years ago mark a new stage 
in hominin evolution. A number of paleoanthropologists 
recognize these fossils as those of a distinct species, Homo 
ergaster. Homo ergaster had a substantially larger brain than 
the neck. Compared to the australopiths, H. habilis had a 
shorter jaw and a larger brain volume, about 550–750 cm3. 
Sharp stone tools have also been found with some fossils of 
H. habilis (the name means “handy man”).
Determining the Equation  
of a Regression Line
How Has Brain Volume Changed 
Over Time in the Hominin 
Lineage? The hominin taxon in-
cludes Homo sapiens and about 20 
extinct species that are thought 
to represent early relatives of hu-
mans. Researchers have found that 
the brain volume of the earliest 
hominins ranged between 300 and 450 cm3, similar to the brain 
volume of chimpanzees. The brain volumes of modern humans 
range between 1,200 and 1,800 cm3. In this exercise, you’ll exam-
ine how mean brain volume changed over time and across vari-
ous hominin species.
How the Study Was Done In this table, xi is the mean age of 
each hominin species, and yi is the mean brain volume (cm3). 
Ages with negative values represent millions of years before the 
present (which has an age of 0.0).
Hominin 
Species
Mean age 
(millions of 
years; xi)xi-x
Mean Brain 
Volume 
(cm3; yi) yi-y
(xi-x)
:
(yi-y)
Ardipithecus 
ramidus
-4.4 325
Australopithecus 
afarensis
-3.4 375
Homo habilis -1.9 550
Homo ergaster -1.6 850
Homo erectus -1.2 1,000
Homo 
heidelbergensis
-0.5 1,200
Homo 
neanderthalensis
-0.1 1,400
Homo sapiens 0.0 1,350
Data from Dean Falk, Florida State University, 2013.
INTERPRET THE DATA 
How did the brain volume of hominin species change over time? 
In particular, is there a linear (straight-line) relationship between 
brain volume and time?
To find out, we’ll perform a linear regression, a technique for 
determining the equation for the straight line that provides a 
“best fit” to a set of data. Recall that the equation for a straight 
line between two variables, x and y, is
y=mx+b
In this equation, m represents the slope of the line, while b repre-
sents the y-intercept (the point at which the straight line crosses 
the y-axis). When m , 0, the line has a negative slope, indicating 
that the values of y become smaller as values of x become larger. 
When m 7 0, the line has a positive slope, meaning that the 
values of y become larger as values of x become larger. When 
 m = 0, y has a constant value (b).
The correlation coefficient, r, can be used to calculate the 
values of m and b in a linear regression:
m=r  
sy
sx
  and b=yQ-mxQ.
In these equations, sx and sy are the standard deviations of vari-
ables x and y, respectively, while x and y are the means of those 
two variables. (See the Scientific Skills Exercise for Chapter 32 for 
more information about the correlation coefficient, mean, and 
standard deviation.)
1. Calculate the means (x and y) from the n=8 data points in 
the table. Next, fill in the (xi-x) and (yi-y) columns in the 
data table, and use those results to calculate the standard de-
viations sx and sy.
2. As described in the Scientific Skills Exercise for Chapter 32, the 
formula for a correlation coefficient is
r=a(xi-x)(yi-y)
(n-1)(sxsy)
Fill in the column in the data table for the product 
(xi-x)*(yi-y). Use these values and the standard deviations 
calculated in question 1 to calculate the correlation coefficient r 
between the brain volume of hominin species (y) and the ages of 
those species (x).
3. Based on the value of r that you calculated in question 2, describe 
in words the correlation between mean brain volume of hominin 
species and the mean age of the species.
4. (a) Use your calculated value of r to calculate the slope (m) and 
the y-intercept (b) of a regression line for this data set. (b) Graph 
the regression line for the mean brain volume of hominin species 
versus the mean age of the species. Be careful to select and label 
your axes correctly. (c) Plot the data from the table on the same 
graph that shows the regression line. Does the regression line ap-
pear to provide a reasonable fit to the data?
5. The equation for a regression line can be used to calculate 
the value of y expected for any particular value of x. For 
example, suppose that a linear regression indicated that 
m=2 and b=4. In this case, when x=5, we expect that 
y=2x+4=(2*5)+4=14. Based on the values of m 
and b that you determined in question 4, use this approach to 
determine the expected mean brain volume for a hominin that 
lived 4 million years ago (that is, x  =  - 4).
6. The slope of a line can be defined as m=
y2-y1
x2-x1
, where 
(x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are the coordinates of two points on the 
line. As such, the slope represents the ratio of the rise of 
a line (how much the line rises vertically) to the run of the 
line (how much the line changes horizontally). Use the defi-
nition of the slope to estimate how long it took for mean 
brain volume to increase by 100 cm3 over the course of 
hominin evolution.
Scientific Skills Exercise
  Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   805 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 807 ===

806 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
to migrate out of Africa. The oldest fossils of hominins out-
side Africa, dating back 1.8 million years, were discovered in 
the present-day country of Georgia. Homo erectus eventually 
migrated as far as the Indonesian archipelago. Fossil evidence 
indicates that H. erectus became extinct between 200,000 and 
70,000 years ago.
Neanderthals
In 1856, miners discovered some mysterious human fossils in 
a cave in the Neander Valley in Germany. The 40,000-year-old 
fossils belonged to a thick-boned hominin with a prominent 
brow. The hominin was named Homo neanderthalensis and is 
commonly called a Neanderthal. Neanderthals were living in 
Europe by 350,000 years ago and later spread to the Near East, 
central Asia, and southern Siberia. They had a brain larger 
than that of present-day humans, buried their dead, and made 
hunting tools from stone and wood. But despite their adapta-
tions and culture, Neanderthals became extinct at some point 
between 28,000 and 40,000 years ago.
What is the evolutionary relationship of Neanderthals 
to Homo sapiens? Genetic data indicate that the lineages 
leading to H. sapiens and to Neanderthals diverged about 
600,000 years ago (Figure 34.51). This indicates that while 
Neanderthals and humans share a relatively recent common 
ancestor, humans did not descend directly from Neanderthals 
(as was once thought). Neanderthals were, in fact, more 
closely related to the “Denisovans,” a hominin whose fossils 
have been discovered in Siberia and Tibet, than to humans.
Another long-standing question is whether mating 
occurred between Neanderthals and humans, leading to 
interspecific gene flow. Some researchers have argued that 
evidence of gene flow can be found in fossils that show 
H. habilis (over 900 cm3), 
as well as long, slender 
legs with hip joints well 
adapted for long-distance 
walking (Figure 34.50). 
The fingers were relatively 
short and straight, sug-
gesting that H. ergaster did 
not climb trees like earlier 
hominins. Homo ergaster 
fossils have been discov-
ered in far more arid envi-
ronments than earlier 
hominins and have been 
associated with more 
sophisticated stone tools. 
Its smaller teeth also sug-
gest that H. ergaster either 
ate different foods than 
australopiths (more meat 
and less plant material) or 
prepared some of its food 
before chewing, perhaps 
by cooking or mashing 
the food.
Homo ergaster marks 
an important shift in the 
relative sizes of the sexes. 
In primates, a size differ-
ence between males and 
females is a major com-
ponent of sexual dimor-
phism (see Concept 23.4). 
On average, male gorillas 
and orangutans weigh 
about twice as much 
as females of their spe-
cies. In Australopithecus 
afarensis, males were 1.5 times as heavy as females. The extent 
of sexual dimorphism decreased further in early Homo, a 
trend that continues through our own species: Human males 
weigh only about 1.2 times as much as females.
The reduced sexual dimorphism may offer some clues to 
the social systems of extinct hominins. In extant primates, 
extreme sexual dimorphism is associated with intense 
male-male competition for multiple females. In species that 
undergo more pair-bonding (including our own), sexual 
dimorphism is less dramatic. In H. ergaster, therefore, males 
and females may have engaged in more pair-bonding than 
earlier hominins did.
Fossils now generally recognized as H. ergaster once were 
considered early members of another species, Homo erectus, 
and some paleoanthropologists still hold this position. 
Homo erectus originated in Africa and was the first hominin 
m Figure 34.50 Fossil of Homo 
ergaster. This 1.7-million-year-
old fossil from Kenya belongs to a 
young Homo ergaster male. This 
individual was tall, slender, and 
fully bipedal, and he had a relatively 
large brain.
in Africa
in Europe
in Asia
in Australia/Pacific
Islands
Interbreeding
†Neanderthals
†Denisovans
About 400,000 ya
About 600,000 ya
About 300,000 ya
Modern
humans
. Figure 34.51 Evolutionary relationships and interbreeding 
among humans, Neanderthals, and Denisovans. Genomic data 
and fossil evidence (see Figure 34.52) document multiple examples 
of interbreeding among humans, Neanderthals, and Denisovans.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   806 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 808 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 807
specimens from Ethiopia 
that are 195,000 and 160,000 
years old (Figure 34.53). 
These early humans had 
less pronounced browridges 
than those found in H. erec-
tus and Neanderthals, and 
they were more slender than 
other recent hominins. The 
Ethiopian fossils support 
inferences about the origin 
of humans from molecular 
evidence. DNA analyses show 
that Europeans and Asians 
share a relatively recent 
common ancestor and that many African lineages branched 
off more basal positions on the human family tree. These 
findings suggest that all living humans have ancestors that 
originated as H. sapiens in Africa.
The oldest fossils of H. sapiens outside Africa are from 
the Middle East and date back about 180,000 years. Fossil 
evidence and genetic analyses suggest that humans spread 
beyond Africa in one or more waves, first into Asia and then 
to Europe and Australia. The date of the first arrival of humans 
in the New World is uncertain, although the oldest generally 
accepted evidence puts that date at about 15,000 years ago.
New findings continually update our understanding of the 
human evolutionary lineage. For example, in 2015, the human 
family gained a new member, Homo naledi. The structure of its 
foot indicates that H. naledi was fully bipedal, and the shape of its 
hand suggests that H. naledi had fine motor skills (Figure 34.54), 
as in H. sapiens, Neanderthals, and other species that used tools 
extensively. But H. naledi also had a small brain, a broadly flared 
upper pelvis, and other features that have led researchers to con-
clude that it was an early member of our genus.
As an early member of our genus, it is likely that H. naledi 
originated more than 1.5 million years ago—yet initial esti-
mates of the age of the H. naledi fossils ranged from 3 million 
a mixture of human and Neanderthal 
characteristics. Recent analyses of the DNA 
sequence of the Neanderthal genome indicated 
that limited gene flow did occur between the two species. In 
2015, the most extensive evidence yet of such gene flow was 
reported: DNA extracted from the fossil of a human jawbone 
was found to contain long stretches of Neanderthal DNA 
(Figure 34.52a). In fact, the amount of Neanderthal DNA in 
this fossil indicated that this individual’s great-great-great-
grandparent was a Neanderthal.
Other recent genomic studies have shown that gene flow 
also occurred between Neanderthals and the Denisovans, 
whose DNA was isolated from bone fragments discovered in a 
Siberian cave. In 2018, for example, DNA analyses revealed that 
the 90,000-year-old bone fragment shown in Figure 34.52b 
came from a woman who had a Neanderthal mother and a 
Denisovan father—a remarkable discovery documenting the 
direct offspring of two different species of hominins. Genomic 
analyses also indicate that gene flow occurred between the 
Denisovans and our own species, H. sapiens.
Homo sapiens
Evidence from fossils, archaeology, and DNA  
studies has improved our understanding 
about how our own species, Homo sapiens, 
emerged and spread around the world.
Fossil evidence indicates that the 
ancestors of humans originated in Africa. 
Older species gave rise to later species, 
ultimately including H. sapiens. A 2017 
study indicates that by 315,000 years ago, 
some hominin populations in Morocco 
had facial features like those of our spe-
cies, while the back of the skull remained 
elongated, as in earlier species. The old-
est known fossils of our species include 
. Figure 34.52 Fossil evidence of interbreeding among 
hominin species. (a) This jawbone belonged to a human who 
lived 40,000 years ago and had a relatively recent Neanderthal 
ancestor. (b) This bone fragment came from a woman who had a 
Neanderthal mother and a Denisovan father.
(b)(a)
. Figure 34.53 A 
160,000-year-old-fossil of 
Homo sapiens.
. Figure 34.54 Fossils of hand bones and foot bones (top and side views)  
of Homo naledi.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   807 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 809 ===

808 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
role in the extinction of other hominins. Neanderthals, for 
example, also made complex tools and showed a capacity for 
symbolic thought. As a result, while some scientists have sug-
gested that Neanderthals were driven to extinction by compe-
tition with H. sapiens, others question that idea.
Our discussion of humans brings this unit on biological 
diversity to an end. But keep in mind that our sequence of 
topics isn’t meant to imply that life consists of a ladder lead-
ing from lowly microorganisms to lofty humanity. Biological 
diversity is the product of branching phylogeny, not lad-
derlike “progress.” The fact that there are almost as many 
species of ray-finned fishes alive today as in all other verte-
brate groups combined shows that our finned relatives are 
not outmoded underachievers that failed to leave the water. 
The tetrapods—amphibians, reptiles, and mammals—are 
derived from one lineage of lobe-finned vertebrates. As tet-
rapods diversified on land, fishes continued their branching 
evolution in the greatest portion of the biosphere’s volume. 
Similarly, the ubiquity of diverse prokaryotes throughout 
the biosphere today is a reminder of the enduring ability of 
these relatively simple organisms to keep up with the times 
through adaptive evolution. Biology exalts life’s diversity, 
past and present.
years old to just 100,000 years old. Scientists didn’t know 
how old the fossils are because they were found on the floor 
of a deep cave, not encased in rocks that could be dated using 
radioactive isotopes. In 2017, however, teeth from a newly 
discovered H. naledi skull were dated using radioactive iso-
topes and found to be 300,000 years old. Overall, fossil evi-
dence suggests that H. naledi arose 1–2 million years ago (like 
other early members of our genus) and then persisted almost 
until the present.
About ten years before the discovery of H. naledi, research-
ers reported another astonishing find: skeletal remains of 
adult hominins dating from 100,000 to 60,000 years ago and 
representing a previously unknown species, Homo floresiensis. 
First discovered in a limestone cave on the Indonesian island 
of Flores, the individuals were much shorter and had a much 
smaller brain volume than H. sapiens—more similar, in fact, to 
an australopith. The researchers who discovered these fossils 
argue that certain features of the skeletons, such as the shape 
of the teeth and the thickness and proportions of the skull, 
suggest that H. floresiensis descended from the larger H. erectus. 
Not convinced, some researchers have argued that the fossils 
represent small H. sapiens individuals with a disorder such as 
Down syndrome or microcephaly (a condition in which a per-
son has a deformed, miniature brain).
Over the past few years, most studies have supported the 
designation of H. floresiensis as a new hominin. One such study 
found that the wrist bones of the Flores fossils are similar in 
shape to those of nonhuman apes and early hominins, but 
different from those of Neanderthals and H. sapiens. These 
researchers concluded that the Flores fossils represent a species 
whose lineage branched off before the origin of the clade that 
includes Neanderthals and humans. A different study compar-
ing the foot bones of the Flores fossils with those of other hom-
inins also concluded that H. floresiensis arose before  H. sapiens. 
Finally, in 2016, H. floresiensis-like fossils dating to 700,000 
years ago were discovered at a second location on Flores—
again indicating that the H. floresiensis lineage branched off 
long before the origin of H. sapiens. Open questions that may 
yet be answered by new discoveries include how H. floresiensis 
originated and whether it survived long enough to encounter 
H. sapiens, which was living in Indonesia by 50,000 years ago.
The rapid expansion of our species may have been 
spurred by changes in human cognition as H. sapiens 
evolved in Africa. Evidence of sophisticated thought in 
H. sapiens includes the recent discovery in South Africa of 
77,000-year-old art—geometric markings made on pieces 
of ochre (Figure 34.55). Similarly, archaeologists working 
in southern and eastern Africa recently found 75,000-year-
old ostrich eggs and snail shells with holes neatly drilled 
through them. By 30,000 years ago, humans were producing 
spectacular cave paintings.
While these developments can help us understand the 
spread of H. sapiens, it is not clear whether they played a 
. Figure 34.55 Art, a human hallmark. The engravings on 
this 77,000-year-old piece of ochre, discovered in South Africa’s 
Blombos Cave, are among the earliest signs of symbolic thought 
in humans.
CONCEPT CHECK 34.7
1. Identify some characters that distinguish hominins from 
other apes.
2. Provide an example in which different features of organ-
isms in the hominin evolutionary lineage evolved at differ-
ent rates.
3. WHAT IF? Some genetic studies suggest that the most 
recent common ancestor of Homo sapiens that lived outside 
of Africa left Africa about 50,000 years ago. Compare this 
date with the dates of fossils given in the text. Can both the 
genetic results and the dates ascribed to the fossils be cor-
rect? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   808 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 810 ===

 CHAPTER 34  Vertebrates 809
Key Concept Clade Description
CONCEPT 34.1 
Chordates have a notochord  
and a dorsal, hollow nerve  
cord (pp. 773–776)
? Describe likely features of the common 
ancestor of chordates. Explain your answer.
Cephalochordata  
(lancelets) 
Basal chordates; marine suspen-
sion feeders that exhibit four key 
derived characters of chordates
Urochordata  
(tunicates) 
Marine suspension feeders; lar-
vae display the derived traits of 
chordates
CONCEPT 34.2 
Vertebrates are chordates that  
have a backbone (pp. 776–779)
? Identify the shared features of early fossil 
vertebrates.
Myxini (hagfishes)  
and Petromyzontida  
(lampreys) 
  
Jawless aquatic vertebrates with 
reduced vertebrae; hagfishes 
have a head with a skull and 
brain, eyes, and other sensory 
organs; some lampreys feed by 
attaching to a live fish and in-
gesting its blood
CONCEPT 34.3 
Gnathostomes are vertebrates  
that have jaws (pp. 779–784)
? How would the appearance of 
organisms with jaws have altered ecological 
interactions? Provide supporting evidence.
Chondrichthyes (sharks,  
rays,  
skates,  
ratfishes) 
Aquatic gnathostomes; have a 
cartilaginous skeleton, a derived 
trait formed by the reduction of 
an ancestral mineralized skeleton
Actinopterygii  
(ray-finned  
fishes) 
Aquatic gnathostomes; have a 
bony skeleton and maneuverable 
fins supported by rays
Actinistia  
(coelacanths) 
Ancient lineage of aquatic lobe-
fins still surviving in Indian Ocean
Dipnoi  
(lungfishes) 
Freshwater lobe-fins with both 
lungs and gills; sister group of 
tetrapods
CONCEPT 34.4 
Tetrapods are gnathostomes  
that have limbs (pp. 784–788)
? Which features of amphibians restrict 
most species to living in aquatic or moist 
terrestrial habitats?
Amphibia (salamanders,  
frogs, caecilians) 
Have four limbs descended from 
modified fins; most have moist 
skin that functions in gas ex-
change; many live both in water 
(as larvae) and on land (as adults)
CONCEPT 34.5 
Amniotes are tetrapods that  
have a terrestrially adapted egg  
(pp. 788–795)
? Explain why birds are considered  
reptiles.
Reptilia (tuataras,  
lizards and snakes,  
turtles, crocodilians,  
birds) 
One of two groups of living am-
niotes; have amniotic eggs and 
rib cage ventilation, key adapta-
tions for life on land
CONCEPT 34.6 
Mammals are amniotes that have 
hair and produce milk  
(pp. 795–801)
? Describe the origin and early evolution of 
mammals.
Mammalia  
(monotremes,  
marsupials,  
eutherians)
Evolved from synapsid ancestors; 
include egg-laying monotremes 
(echidnas, platypus); pouched 
marsupials (such as kangaroos, 
opossums); and eutherians (pla-
cental mammals, such as rodents, 
primates)
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
Chordates: notochord; dorsal, hollow nerve cord; pharyngeal slits; post-anal tail
Vertebrates: Hox genes duplication, backbone of vertebrae
Gnathostomes: hinged jaws, four sets of Hox genes Cyclostomes: jawless vertebrates
Osteichthyans: bony skeleton
Lobe-fins: muscular fins or limbs
Tetrapods: four limbs, neck, fused pelvic girdle
 Amniotes: amniotic egg, rib cage ventilation
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
34 Chapter Review
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   809 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 811 ===

Humans are mammals that have a large brain  
and bipedal locomotion (pp. 802–808)
• Derived characters of humans include bipedalism and a larger 
brain and reduced jaw compared with other apes.
• Hominins—humans and species that are more closely related 
to humans than to chimpanzees—originated in Africa about 8 
million years ago. Early hominins had a small brain but probably 
walked upright.
• The oldest evidence of tool use is 2.5 million years old.
• Homo ergaster was the first fully bipedal, large-brained hominin. 
Homo erectus was the first hominin to leave Africa.
• Neanderthals lived in Europe and the Near East from about 
350,000 to 28,000 years ago.
• Homo sapiens originated in Africa about 195,000 years ago and 
began to spread to other continents about 180,000 years ago.
? Based on fossil evidence, summarize how key hominin features have 
changed over time.
CONCEPT 34.7
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
7. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Living members of a vertebrate 
lineage can be very different from early members of the lineage, 
and evolutionary reversals (character losses) are common. Give 
examples that illustrate these observations, and explain their 
evolutionary causes.
8. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • DRAW IT As a consequence of size 
alone, larger organisms tend to have larger brains than smaller 
organisms. However, some organisms have brains that are 
considerably larger than expected for their size. There are 
high energetic costs associated with the development and 
maintenance of brains that are large relative to body size.
(a) The fossil record documents trends in which brains that are 
large relative to body size evolved in certain lineages, includ-
ing hominins. In such lineages, what can you infer about the 
costs and benefits of large brains?
(b) Hypothesize how natural selection might favor the evolution 
of large brains despite their high maintenance costs.
(c) Data for 14 bird species are listed below. Graph the data, plac-
ing deviation from expected brain size on the x-axis and mor-
tality rate on the y-axis. What can you conclude about the 
relationship between brain size and mortality?
*Values 6 0 indicate brain sizes smaller than expected; values 7 0 indicate sizes 
larger than expected.
Deviation  
from  
Expected  
Brain Size*
-2.4-2.1-2.0-1.8-1.0 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.3 2.0 2.3 3.0 3.2
Mortality  
Rate
0.9 0.7 0.5 0.9 0.4 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.8 0.3 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.6
Data from D. Sol et al., Big-brained birds survive better in nature, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B 274:763–769 (2007).
9. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Early tetrapods 
had a sprawling gait (like that of a lizard): As the right front foot 
moved forward, the body twisted to the left and the left rib cage 
and lung were compressed; the reverse occurred with the next 
step. Normal breathing, in which both lungs expand equally 
with each breath, was hindered during walking and prevented 
during running. In a short essay (100–150 words), explain how 
the origin of organisms such as dinosaurs, whose gait allowed 
them to move without compressing their lungs, could have led 
to emergent properties.
10. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This animal is a vertebrate with hair. What can you infer about 
its phylogeny? Identify as many key derived characters as you 
can that distinguish this animal from invertebrate chordates.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–6 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
810 UNIT FIVE  The Diversity of Life
URRY1637_12_GE_C34_PRF.indd   810 3/21/20   3:26 AM

=== SIDE 812 ===

PLANTS: STRUCTURE  
AND FUNCTION
Unit 6 
 811
How did you get interested in plant 
biology?
I was born on a sugar plantation in 
Kohala, Hawaii, so I grew up in an agricul-
tural setting. My dad was a laborer on the 
Kohala Sugar Plantation. I attended the 
University of Hawaii to study agriculture 
engineering 
because my 
goal was to 
get a degree 
and then work 
on the sugar 
plantations as 
an agriculture 
engineer. But 
when I was a 
sophomore, 
the sugar 
plantations were 
closing in Hawaii, 
and the program 
was disbanded. I 
took up horticulture 
as an alternative. 
After graduation, 
I moved to Kauai, 
where there was a 
University of Hawaii 
experiment station 
where I worked as 
a technician in a 
plant pathology lab. 
There, I was a given 
a small project of 
my own to work on, 
and I fell in love with 
research.
Tell us about your experiences in 
graduate school.
I went to UC Davis for my Ph.D. I under-
stood the material. I could do the research. 
But when it came to giving lectures, I was 
hampered by a stuttering problem. A few 
months before I got my Ph.D., I applied for 
a job at the University of Florida and was in-
vited for an interview. And then I thought, 
“I have to interview. I am a poor speaker. 
I don’t stand a chance if I do a poor job.” 
I was sick with stress. I practiced and prac-
ticed, and then it dawned on me, “I know 
more about this topic than my professors 
do. I’m the expert.” So, I flew to Florida, and 
I will never forget that day: I got up and 
gave my talk, and I have not stuttered since!
What is the ringspot virus and how 
did you become interested in it?
The virus produces a ring 
spot on the fruit, but more 
importantly, the leaves 
turn yellow, the growth 
gets stunted, and often the 
plant won’t produce fruit. It 
is rapidly transmitted by aphids, 
small sap-sucking insects. An aphid can land 
on an infected papaya, feed for less than 
a minute, then jump to a healthy papaya 
plant and infect it. In 1978, I returned to 
Hawaii for a short vacation and I met a col-
league who told me, “Dennis, there is this 
virus disease on the Big Island where they 
grow 95% of the papaya, and it’s close to 
the papaya-growing areas. People are try-
ing to prevent it from spreading.” So, when 
I returned to Cornell, I tried to figure out 
how to control the papaya ringspot virus.
What was your strategy in fighting 
the disease?
In our initial attempt, we used 
artificial selection to isolate a 
mild strain of papaya ringspot 
virus to protect plants against infec-
tion, but it didn’t grow well under field 
conditions. I have learned, however, as a 
scientist, sometimes you have to change 
directions. I was a classical virologist, but 
I decided to retrain myself as a molecu-
lar biologist. Research by others with 
tobacco had established that certain 
viral genes, if introduced into the host 
plant genome, induce resistance. Other 
colleagues at Cornell had invented a 
“gene gun” that uses fine, DNA-coated 
tungsten beads to literally shoot DNA 
into cells. We shot tungsten beads coated 
with DNA of the coat protein gene of 
the ringspot virus into papaya embryos 
growing in culture. Some of these geneti-
cally modified embryos could be grown 
into plants. When I inoculated them with 
the virus, one line was completely resis-
tant; it became a parent of the resistant 
“Rainbow” 
variety. 
“Rainbow” 
was developed 
just in time be-
cause the virus 
had spread into 
the main papaya-growing areas and was 
decimating the papaya crop.
Have foes of genetically modified 
foods opposed your research?
In 1994, we teamed up with Thai re-
searchers to repeat our success using 
a large-fruited papaya variety popular 
in Thailand. Ten years later, we were 
successful, but opponents of genetic 
engineering stormed the fences sur-
rounding our field trials and destroyed 
many of the fruit. That transgenic 
papaya has never seen the light of 
day. Although I’ve had a pretty good 
career, that was a heartbreaking thing 
for me.
Meet the man who saved the papaya industry 
in Hawaii, Dennis Gonsalves. Dr. Gonsalves 
received a B.S. in Horticulture and a M.S. in Plant 
Pathology from the University of Hawaii, Manoa, 
and a Ph.D. in Plant Pathology from the University 
of California, Davis. He became an Associate 
Professor of plant pathology at the University of 
Florida and later a Liberty Hyde Bailey Professor at 
Cornell University. He and his colleagues created 
virus-resistant papaya plants that rescued the 
papaya-growing industry in Hawaii from the 
devastating effects of the ringspot virus. He then 
served as the Director of the Agricultural Research 
Center in Hilo, Hawaii, until he retired in 2012. He 
received the Humboldt Prize for renowned scien-
tific research in 1992 and the Lee Hutchison Award 
for accomplishments in research, mentoring, and 
outreach to developing countries.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
Dennis Gonsalves
“As a scientist, sometimes 
you have to change 
directions.”
b Top: A papaya tree infected 
with ringspot virus. Inset: An 
infected papaya fruit. Bottom: 
A “Rainbow” papaya tree that is 
resistant to ringspot virus.
URRY1637_12_GE_U06_PRF.indd   811 3/21/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 813 ===

Figure 35.1 There is beauty to behold at every level of plant organization: Every  
cell, every tissue, and every organ has a function, and the structure of each has  
been molded by natural selection.
35Plant Structure and Growth
Leaves provide 
surface area for 
absorbing sunlight and 
exchanging gases.
Ground tissue 
includes cells that carry 
out photosynthesis and 
store sugars.
Roots anchor the plant and 
absorb water and minerals.
Stems
support and 
elevate leaves, 
maximizing 
photosynthesis.
At the organ level
Photosynthetic cells 
are packed with chloroplasts 
that convert 
sunlight into 
chemical 
energy.
At the cellular level
Dermal 
tissue 
protects 
organs.
Vascular 
tissue 
provides 
support and 
transports 
resources.
Tube-shaped 
cells transport 
resources. The cell 
shown here 
carries water and 
minerals. Others 
conduct sugars.
Cells with 
root hairs 
near the tips 
of roots 
increase the 
surface area 
for absorbing 
water and 
minerals.
At the tissue level
Leaf cross section
Chloroplasts
How does structure fit function 
in vascular plants?
KEY CONCEPTS
35.1 Plants have a hierarchical 
organization consisting of organs, 
tissues, and cells p. 813
35.2 Different meristems generate new 
cells for primary and secondary 
growth p. 820
35.3 Primary growth lengthens roots 
and shoots p. 822
35.4 Secondary growth increases the 
diameter of stems and roots in 
woody plants p. 826
35.5 Growth, morphogenesis, and cell 
differentiation produce the plant 
body p. 829
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 35
• BioFlix® Animation: Tour of a Plant Cell
• Figure 35.19 Walkthrough: Secondary 
Growth of a Woody Stem
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Visualizing Primary and 
Secondary Growth
• Activity: Primary and Secondary Growth
Study Tip
Make a table: To help keep track of 
what different plant cells do, make the 
following table:
Type of
plant cell
How structure
ﬁts functionWhat it does
812
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   812 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 814 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 813
embryo, is the first root (and the first organ) to emerge from 
a germinating seed. It soon branches to form lateral roots 
(see Figure 35.2) that can also branch, greatly enhancing the 
ability of the root system to anchor the plant and to acquire 
resources such as water and minerals from the soil.
Tall, erect plants with large shoot masses generally have 
a taproot system, consisting of one main vertical root, the 
taproot, which usually develops from the primary root. In 
taproot systems, the role of absorption is restricted largely 
to the tips of lateral roots. A taproot, although energetically 
expensive to make, facilitates the anchorage of the plant in 
the soil. By preventing toppling, the taproot enables the plant 
to grow taller, thereby giving it access to more favorable light 
conditions and, in some cases, providing an advantage for 
pollen and seed dispersal. Taproots can also be specialized for 
food storage.
Small vascular plants or those that have a trailing growth 
habit are particularly susceptible to grazing animals that 
can uproot the plant and kill it. Such plants are most effi-
ciently anchored by a fibrous root system, a thick mat of slen-
der roots spreading out below the soil surface (see Figure 
30.16). In plants that have fibrous root systems, including 
most monocots, the primary root dies early on and does not 
Chapters 29 and 30 provided an overview of plant diversity, 
including both nonvascular and vascular plants. In this chap-
ter and throughout Unit Six, we’ll focus on vascular plants, 
especially angiosperms because flowering plants are the 
primary producers in many terrestrial ecosystems and are of 
great agricultural importance. This chapter mainly explores 
nonreproductive growth—roots, stems, and leaves—and 
focuses primarily on the two main groups of angiosperms: 
eudicots and monocots (see Figure 30.16). Later, in Chapter 
38, we’ll examine angiosperm reproductive growth: flowers, 
seeds, and fruits.
CONCEPT 35.1
Plants have a hierarchical 
organization consisting of  
organs, tissues, and cells
Plants, like most animals, are composed of cells, tissues, 
and organs. A cell is the fundamental unit of life. A tissue 
is a group of cells consisting of one or more cell types that 
together perform a specialized function. An organ consists of 
several types of tissues that together carry out particular func-
tions. As you learn about plant structure, keep in mind how 
natural selection has produced plant forms that fit plant func-
tion at all levels of structure. We begin by discussing plant 
organs because their structures are most familiar.
Vascular Plant Organs:  
Roots, Stems, and Leaves
EVOLUTION The basic morphology, or shape, of vascular 
plants reflects their evolutionary history as terrestrial organ-
isms that inhabit and draw resources from two very different 
environments—below the ground and above the ground. 
They must absorb water and minerals from below the ground 
surface and CO2 and light from above the ground surface. The 
ability to acquire these resources efficiently is traceable to the 
evolution of roots, stems, and leaves as the three basic organs. 
These organs form a root system and a shoot system, the 
latter consisting of stems and leaves (Figure 35.2). Vascular 
plants, with few exceptions, rely on both systems for survival. 
Roots are almost never photosynthetic; they starve unless 
photosynthates, the sugars and the other carbohydrates pro-
duced during photosynthesis, are imported from the shoot 
system. Conversely, the shoot system depends on the water 
and minerals that roots absorb from the soil.
Roots
A root is an organ that anchors a vascular plant in the soil, 
absorbs minerals and water, and often stores carbohydrates 
and other reserves. The primary root, originating in the seed 
. Figure 35.2 An overview of a flowering plant. The plant 
body is divided into a root system and a shoot system, connected 
by vascular tissue (purple strands in this diagram) that is continuous 
throughout the plant. The plant shown is an idealized eudicot.
Apical bud
Node
Internode
Apical
bud
Reproductive shoot (flower)
Vegetative
shoot
LeafPetiole
Blade
Taproot
Root
system
Lateral
(branch)
roots
Shoot
system
Stem
Axillary
bud
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   813 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 815 ===

 Mastering Biology Video: 
Root Growth in a Radish 
Seedling
b Buttress roots. Because of moist 
conditions in the tropics, root systems 
of many of the tallest trees are 
surprisingly shallow. Aerial roots that 
look like buttresses, such as seen in 
Gyranthera caribensis in Venezuela, 
give architectural support to 
the trunks of trees.
c “Strangling” aerial roots. 
Strangler fig seeds germi-
nate in the crevices of tall 
trees. Aerial roots grow      
to the ground, wrapping 
around the host 
tree and objects 
such as this 
Cambodian 
temple. Shoots 
grow upward 
and shade out 
the host tree, 
killing it.
m Prop roots. The aerial, adventitious 
roots of maize (corn) are prop roots, so 
named because they support tall, 
top-heavy plants. All roots of a mature 
maize plant are adventitious whether 
they emerge above or below ground.
m Pneumatophores. Also known as air 
roots, pneumatophores are produced by 
trees such as mangroves that inhabit tidal 
swamps. By projecting above the water’s 
surface at low tide, they enable the root 
system to obtain oxygen, which is lacking 
in the thick, waterlogged mud. 
m Storage roots. 
Many plants, such 
as the common 
beet, store food 
and water in their 
roots.
c Figure 35.3 Root hairs  
of a radish seedling. Root 
hairs grow by the thousands 
just behind the tip of each root. 
By increasing the root’s surface 
area, they greatly enhance 
the absorption of water and 
minerals from the soil.
. Figure 35.4 Evolutionary 
adaptations of roots.
form a taproot. Instead, many small roots emerge from the 
stem. Such roots are said to be adventitious, a term describing  
a plant organ that grows in an unusual location, such as roots  
arising from stems or leaves. Each root forms its own lateral 
roots, which in turn form their own lateral roots. Because this  
mat of roots holds the topsoil in place, plants such as grasses  
that have dense fibrous root systems are especially good at 
preventing soil erosion.
In most plants, the absorption of water and minerals 
occurs primarily near the tips of elongating roots, where vast 
numbers of root hairs, thin, finger-like extensions of root 
epidermal cells, emerge and increase the surface area of the 
root enormously (Figure 35.3). Most root systems also form  
mycorrhizal associations, symbiotic interactions with soil fungi 
that increase a plant’s ability to absorb minerals (see Figure 
37.14). The roots of many plants are adapted for specialized 
functions (Figure 35.4).
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   814 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 816 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 815
Leaves
In most vascular plants, the leaf is the main photosyn-
thetic organ. In addition to intercepting light, leaves 
exchange gases with the atmosphere, dissipate heat, and 
defend themselves from herbivores and pathogens. These 
functions may have conflicting anatomical and physiologi-
cal requirements. For example, a dense covering of hairs 
may help repel herbivorous insects but may also trap air 
near the leaf surface, thereby reducing gas exchange and, 
consequently, photosynthesis. Because of these conflicting 
demands and trade-offs, leaves vary extensively in form. In 
general, however, a leaf consists of a flattened blade and a 
stalk, the petiole, which joins the leaf to the stem at a node 
(see Figure 35.2). Grasses and many other monocots lack 
petioles; instead, the base of the leaf forms a sheath that 
envelops the stem.
Monocots and eudicots differ in the arrangement of veins, 
the vascular tissue of leaves. Most monocots have paral-
lel major veins of equal diameter that run the length of the 
blade. Eudicots generally have a branched network of veins 
arising from a major vein (the midrib) that runs down the cen-
ter of the blade (see Figure 30.16).
In identifying angiosperms according to structure, tax-
onomists rely mainly on floral morphology, but they also use 
variations in leaf morphology, such as leaf shape, the branch-
ing pattern of veins, and the spatial arrangement of leaves. 
Figure 35.6 illustrates a difference in leaf shape: simple versus 
compound. Unlike leaves, the leaflets of compound leaves are 
not associated with axillary buds. Compound leaves may help 
confine invading pathogens to a single leaflet, rather than 
allowing them to spread to the entire leaf.
Stems
A stem is a plant organ bearing leaves and buds. Its chief 
function is to elongate and orient the shoot in a way that 
maximizes photosynthesis by the leaves. Another function of 
stems is to elevate reproductive structures, thereby facilitating 
the dispersal of pollen and fruit. Green stems may also per-
form a limited amount of photosynthesis. Each stem consists 
of an alternating system of nodes, the points at which leaves 
are attached, and internodes, the stem segments between 
nodes (see Figure 35.2). Most of the growth of a young shoot 
is concentrated near the growing shoot tip, or apical bud. 
Apical buds are not the only types of buds found in shoots. In 
the upper angle (axil) formed by each leaf and the stem is an 
axillary bud, which can potentially form a lateral branch 
or, in some cases, a thorn or flower.
Some plants have stems with alternative functions, such as 
food storage or asexual reproduction. Many of these modified 
stems, including rhizomes, stolons, and tubers, are often mis-
taken for roots (Figure 35.5).
. Figure 35.5 Evolutionary adaptations of stems.
b Tubers. Tubers, such
    as these potatoes, are 
enlarged ends of 
rhizomes or stolons 
specialized for storing 
food. The “eyes” of a 
potato are clusters of 
axillary buds.
b Rhizomes. The base of this iris 
plant is an example of a rhizome, 
a horizontal shoot that grows just 
below the surface. Vertical shoots 
emerge from axillary buds on the 
rhizome.
Stolon
Rhizome
Root
b 
Stolons. Shown 
here on a straw-
berry plant, stolons 
are horizontal 
shoots that grow 
along the surface. 
These “runners” 
enable a plant to 
reproduce asexually, 
as plantlets grow 
from axillary buds 
along each runner.
c
? Which of these three examples has nodes?
. Figure 35.6 Simple versus compound leaves.
A simple leaf has a single, 
undivided blade. Some 
simple leaves are deeply 
lobed, as shown here.
In a compound leaf, the 
blade consists of multiple 
leaflets. A leaflet has no axillary 
bud at its base. In some plants, 
each leaflet is further divided 
into smaller leaflets.
PetioleAxillary
bud
Simple leaf
PetioleAxillary
bud
Leaflet
Compound leaf
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   815 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 817 ===

816 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
The shapes of leaves are often products of genetic 
 programs that are tweaked by environmental influences. 
Interpret the data in the Scientific Skills Exercise to explore 
the roles of genetics and the environment in determining leaf 
morphology in red maple trees.
Almost all leaves are specialized for photosynthesis. 
However, in some species evolution has resulted in additional 
functions, such as support, protection, storage, or asexual 
reproduction (Figure 35.7). Some are sporophylls, leaves 
highly specialized for sexual reproduction, such as carpels 
and stamens in flowers (see Figure 30.12).
Dermal, Vascular, and Ground Tissues
All three basic vascular plant organs—roots, stems, and 
leaves—are composed of three fundamental tissue types: 
dermal, vascular, and ground tissues. Each of these general 
types forms a tissue system that is continuous through-
out the plant, connecting all the organs. However, specific 
characteristics of the tissues and the spatial relationships of 
tissues to one another vary in different organs (Figure 35.8).
Dermal tissue serves as the outer protective covering of the 
plant. Like our skin, it forms the first line of defense against phys-
ical damage and pathogens. In nonwoody plants, it is usually 
Using Bar Graphs to Interpret Data
Nature Versus Nurture: Why Are Leaves from 
Northern Red Maples “Toothier” Than Leaves 
from Southern Red Maples? Not all leaves 
of the red maple (Acer rubrum) are the 
same. The “teeth” along the margins of 
leaves growing in northern locations dif-
fer in size and number from those of their 
southern counterparts. (The leaf seen here 
has an intermediate appearance.) Are these 
differences due to genetic differences be-
tween northern and southern Acer rubrum 
populations, or do they arise from environmental 
differences between northern and southern locations, such as 
average temperature, that affect gene expression?
How the Experiment Was Done Seeds of Acer rubrum were 
collected from four latitudinally distinct sites: Ontario (Canada), 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Florida. The seeds from the 
four sites were then grown in a northern location (Rhode Island) 
and a southern location (Florida). After a few years of growth, 
leaves were harvested from the four sets of plants growing in the 
two locations. The average area of single teeth and the average 
number of teeth per leaf area were determined.
Data from the Experiment
Seed 
Collection Site
Average Area of a 
Single Tooth (cm2)
Number of Teeth per 
cm2 of Leaf Area
Grown 
in Rhode 
Island
Grown in 
Florida
Grown 
in Rhode 
Island
Grown in 
Florida
Ontario 
(43.32°N)
0.017 0.017 3.9 3.2
Pennsylvania 
(42.12°N)
0.020 0.014 3.0 3.5
South Carolina 
(33.45°N)
0.024 0.028 2.3 1.9
Florida 
(30.65°N)
0.027 0.047 2.1 0.9
Data from D. L. Royer et al., Phenotypic plasticity of leaf shape along a tempera-
ture gradient in Acer rubrum, PLoS ONE 4(10):e7653 (2009).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. Make a bar graph for tooth size and a bar graph for number of 
teeth. (For information on bar graphs, see the Scientific Skills 
Review in Appendix D.) From north to south, what is the general 
trend in tooth size and number of teeth in leaves of Acer rubrum?
2. Based on the data, would you conclude that leaf tooth traits in 
the red maple are largely determined by genetic heritage (geno-
type), by the capacity for responding to environmental change 
within a single genotype (phenotypic plasticity), or by both? 
Make specific reference to the data in answering the question.
3. The “toothiness” of leaf fossils of known age has been used 
by paleoclimatologists to estimate past temperatures in a re-
gion. If a 10,000-year-old fossilized red maple leaf from South 
Carolina had an average of 4.2 teeth per square centimeter 
of leaf area, what could you infer about the temperature of 
South Carolina 10,000 years ago compared with the tempera-
ture today? Explain your reasoning.
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
. Figure 35.7 Evolutionary adaptations of leaves.
c Tendrils. The tendrils by which this pea plant clings to a 
support are modified leaves. After it has “lassoed” a 
support, a tendril forms a coil that brings the plant closer 
to the support. Tendrils 
are typically modified 
leaves, but some tendrils 
are modified stems, as in 
grapevines.
b Storage leaves. Bulbs, 
such as this cut onion, 
have a short underground 
stem and modified leaves 
that store food.
b Spines. The spines of cacti, such 
as this prickly pear, are actually 
leaves; photosynthesis is carried 
out by the fleshy green stems.
  Reproductive leaves. The 
leaves of some succulents, such 
as Kalanchoë daigremontiana, 
produce adventitious plantlets, 
which fall off the leaf and take 
root in the soil.
b
Storage leaves
Plantlet
Stem
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   816 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 818 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 817
made (usually the leaves) to where they are needed or stored— 
usually roots and sites of growth, such as developing leaves and 
fruits. The vascular tissue of a root or stem is collectively called 
the stele (the Greek word for “pillar”). The arrangement of 
the stele varies, depending on the species and organ. In angio-
sperms, for example, the root stele is a solid central vascular 
cylinder of xylem and phloem, whereas the stele of stems and 
leaves consists of vascular bundles, separate strands containing 
xylem and phloem (see Figure 35.8). Both xylem and phloem 
are composed of a variety of cell types, including cells that are 
highly specialized for transport or support.
Tissue that is neither dermal nor vascular is ground 
 t i s s u e. Ground tissue that is internal to the vascular tissue is 
known as pith, and ground tissue that is external to the vas-
cular tissue is called cortex. Ground tissue is not just filler: It 
includes cells specialized for functions such as storage, photo-
synthesis, support, and short-distance transport.
Common Types of Plant Cells
In a plant, as in any multicellular organism, cells undergo cell 
differentiation; that is, they become specialized in structure and 
function during the course of development. Cell differentiation 
may involve changes both in the cytoplasm and its organelles 
and in the cell wall. Figure 35.10, on the next two pages, focuses 
on the major types of plant cells. Notice the structural adapta-
tions that make specific functions possible. You may also wish to 
review basic plant cell structure (see Figures 7.8 and 7.27).
a single tissue called the epidermis, a layer of tightly packed 
cells. In leaves and most stems, the cuticle, a waxy epidermal 
coating, helps prevent water loss. In woody plants, protective tis-
sues called periderm replace the epidermis in older regions of 
stems and roots. In addition to protecting the plant from water 
loss and disease, the epidermis has specialized characteristics in 
each organ. In roots, water and minerals absorbed from the soil 
enter through the epidermis, especially in root hairs. In shoots, 
specialized epidermal cells called guard cells are involved in 
gaseous exchange. Another class of highly specialized epidermal 
cells found in shoots consists of outgrowths called trichomes. 
In some desert species, hairlike trichomes reduce water loss 
and reflect excess light. Some trichomes defend against insects 
through shapes that hinder movement or glands that secrete 
sticky fluids or toxic compounds (Figure 35.9).
The two major functions of vascular tissue are to facilitate 
the transport of materials through the plant and to provide 
mechanical support. Vascular tissues are of two types: xylem 
and phloem. Xylem conducts water and dissolved miner-
als upward from roots into the shoots. Phloem transports 
sugars, the products of photosynthesis, from where they are 
. Figure 35.8 The three tissue systems. The dermal tissue 
system (blue) provides a protective cover for the entire body of 
a plant. The vascular tissue system (purple), which transports 
materials between the root and shoot systems, is also continuous 
throughout the plant but is arranged differently in each organ. The 
ground tissue system (yellow), which is responsible for most of the 
metabolic functions, is located between the dermal tissue and the 
vascular tissue in each organ.
Dermal
tissue
Vascular 
tissue
Ground 
tissue
. Figure 35.9 Trichome diversity on the surface of a leaf. 
Three types of trichomes are found on the surface of marjoram 
(Origanum majorana). Spear-like trichomes help hinder the 
movement of crawling insects, while the other two types of trichomes 
secrete oils and other chemicals involved in defense (colorized SEM).
Trichomes
300 om
CONCEPT CHECK 35.1
1. How does the vascular tissue system enable leaves and roots 
to function together in supporting growth and develop-
ment of the whole plant?
2. WHAT IF? If humans were photoautotrophs, making food 
by capturing light energy for photosynthesis, how might 
our anatomy be different?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain how central vacuoles and 
cellulose cell walls contribute to plant growth (see Concepts 
7.4 and 7.7).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Tour of a Plant Cell
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   817 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 819 ===

818 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
Mature parenchyma cells have primary walls that are relatively thin and ﬂexible, and 
most lack secondary walls. (See Figure 7.27 to review primary and secondary cell walls.) 
When mature, parenchyma cells generally have a large central vacuole. Parenchyma cells 
perform most of the metabolic functions of the plant, synthesizing and storing various 
organic products. For example, photosynthesis occurs within the chloroplasts of paren-
chyma cells in the leaf. Some parenchyma cells in stems and roots have colorless plastids 
called amyloplasts that store starch. The ﬂeshy tissue of many fruits is composed mainly of 
parenchyma cells. Most parenchyma cells retain the ability to divide and differentiate into 
other types of plant cells under particular conditions—during wound repair, for example. It 
is even possible to grow an entire plant from a single parenchyma cell.
Grouped in strands, collenchyma cells (seen here in cross section) help support young 
parts of the plant shoot. Collenchyma cells are generally elongated cells that have thicker 
primary walls than parenchyma cells, though the walls are unevenly thickened. Young stems 
and petioles often have strands of collenchyma cells just below their epidermis. Collenchyma 
cells provide ﬂexible support without restraining growth. At maturity, these cells are living 
and ﬂexible, elongating with the stems and leaves they support—unlike sclerenchyma cells, 
which we discuss next.
Sclerenchyma cells also function as supporting elements in the 
plant but are much more rigid than collenchyma cells. In scleren-
chyma cells, the secondary cell wall, produced after cell elonga-
tion has ceased, is thick and contains large amounts of lignin, a 
relatively indigestible strengthening polymer that accounts for 
more than a quarter of the dry mass of wood. Lignin is present in 
all vascular plants but not in bryophytes. Mature sclerenchyma 
cells cannot elongate, and they occur in regions of the plant that 
have stopped growing in length. Sclerenchyma cells are so spe-
cialized for support that many are dead at functional maturity, 
but they produce secondary walls before the protoplast (the liv-
ing part of the cell) dies. The rigid walls remain as a “skeleton”
that supports the plant, in some cases for hundreds of years.
    Two types of sclerenchyma cells, known as sclereids and 
ﬁbers, are specialized entirely for support and strengthening. 
Sclereids, which are boxier than ﬁbers and irregular in shape, 
have very thick, ligniﬁed secondary walls. Sclereids impart the 
hardness to nutshells and seed coats and the gritty texture to 
pear fruits. Fibers, which are usually grouped in strands, are long, 
slender, and tapered. Some are used commercially, such as hemp 
ﬁbers for making rope and ﬂax ﬁbers for weaving into linen.
Parenchyma cells in a 
privet (Ligustrum) leaf (LM) 25 om
Collenchyma cells in a
common nettle (Urtica dioica) stem (LM)5 om
Fiber cells (cross section from ash tree) (LM)
Sclereid cells (in pear) (LM)
Cell wall
5 om
25 om
Parenchyma Cells
Collenchyma Cells
Sclerenchyma Cells
. Figure 35.10 Exploring Examples of Differentiated Plant Cells
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   818 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 820 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 819
Kristina
NEED photo
but can’t download
It’s a quicktime movie
Can you download?
The two types of water-conducting cells, tracheids
vessel elements
 and 
, are tubular, elongated cells that are dead and 
lignified at functional maturity. Tracheids occur in the xylem of 
all vascular plants. In addition to tracheids, most angiosperms, 
as well as a few gymnosperms and a few seedless vascular plants, 
have vessel elements. When the living cellular contents of a tra-
cheid or vessel element disintegrate, the cell’s thickened walls 
remain behind, forming a nonliving conduit through which water 
can flow. The secondary walls of tracheids and vessel elements 
are often interrupted by pits, thinner regions where only primary 
walls are present (see Figure 7.27 to review primary and secon-
dary walls). Water can migrate laterally between neighboring cells 
    Tracheids are long, thin cells with tapered ends. Water moves 
through pits.
from cell to cell mainly through the pits, where it does not have to 
cross thick secondary walls.
    Vessel elements are generally wider, shorter, thinner walled, and 
less tapered than the tracheids. They are aligned end to end, form-
ing long pipes known as vessels that in some cases are visible with 
the naked eye. The end walls of vessel elements have perforation 
plates that enable water to flow freely through the vessels.
    The secondary walls of tracheids and vessel elements are 
hardened with lignin. This hardening provides support and prevents 
collapse under the tension of water transport.
Sugar-Conducting Cells of the Phloem
Unlike the water-conducting cells of the xylem, the 
sugar-conducting cells of the phloem are alive at 
functional maturity. In seedless vascular plants and 
gymnosperms, sugars and other organic nutrients 
are transported through long, narrow cells called 
sieve cells. In the phloem of angiosperms, these nu-
trients are transported through sieve tubes, which 
consist of chains of cells that are called sieve-tube 
elements, or sieve-tube members.
    Though alive, sieve-tube elements lack a nucleus, ri-
bosomes, a distinct vacuole, and cytoskeletal elements. 
This reduction in cell contents enables nutrients to 
pass more easily through the cell. The end walls be-
tween sieve-tube elements, called sieve plates, have 
pores that facilitate the flow of fluid from cell to cell 
along the sieve tube. Alongside each sieve-tube ele-
ment is a nonconducting cell called a companion cell, 
which is connected to the sieve-tube element by nu-
merous plasmodesmata (see Figure 7.27). The nucleus 
and ribosomes of the companion cell serve not only 
that cell itself but also the adjacent sieve-tube element. 
In some plants, the companion cells in leaves also help 
load sugars into the sieve-tube elements, which then 
transport the sugars to other parts of the plant.
Water-Conducting Cells of the Xylem
Pits
Pits
Perforation
plate
Tracheids
Tracheids and vessels
(colorized SEM)
Vessel
element
Vessel
Vessel elements, with
perforated end walls
Tracheids
100 om
30 om
15 om
3 om
Sieve-tube elements:
longitudinal view (LM)
Sieve-tube element (left)
and companion cell:
cross section (TEM)
Sieve-tube elements:
longitudinal view Sieve plate with pores (LM)
Companion
cells
Sieve plate
Sieve-tube
elements
Plasmodesma
Sieve
plate
Nucleus of
companion
cell
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   819 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 821 ===

820 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
and internodes. On each growth segment, nodes are marked 
by scars left when leaves fell. Leaf scars are prominent in many 
twigs. Above each scar is an axillary bud or a branch formed by 
an axillary bud. Farther down are bud scars from whorls of scales 
that enclosed the apical bud during the previous winter. In each 
growing season, primary growth extends shoots, and secondary 
growth increases the diameter of parts formed in previous years.
Although meristems enable plants to grow throughout their 
lives, plants do die, of course. Based on the length of their life 
cycle, flowering plants can be categorized as annuals, biennials, 
or perennials. Annuals complete their life cycle—from germina-
tion to flowering to seed production to death—in a single year or 
less. Many wildflowers are annuals, as are most staple food crops, 
including legumes and cereal grains such as wheat and rice. 
Dying after producing seeds and fruits enables plants to transfer 
the maximum amount of energy to reproduction. Biennials, 
such as turnips, generally require two growing seasons to com-
plete their life cycle, flowering and fruiting only in their second 
year. Perennials live many years and include trees, shrubs, and 
some grasses. Some buffalo grass of the North American plains is 
thought to have been growing for 10,000 years from seeds that 
sprouted at the close of the last ice age.
Different meristems generate 
new cells for primary and 
secondary growth
A major difference between plants and most animals is that 
plant growth is not limited to an embryonic or juvenile 
period. Instead, growth occurs throughout the plant’s life, 
a process called indeterminate growth. Plants can keep 
growing because they have undifferentiated tissues called 
meristems containing cells that can divide, leading to new 
cells that elongate and become differentiated (Figure 35.11). 
Except for dormant periods, most plants grow continuously. 
In contrast, most animals and some plant organs—such 
as leaves, thorns, and flowers—undergo determinate 
growth; they stop growing after reaching a certain size.
There are two main types of meristems: apical meristems 
and lateral meristems. Apical meristems, located at root and 
shoot tips, provide cells that enable primary growth, growth 
in length. Primary growth allows roots to extend throughout the 
soil and shoots to increase exposure to light. In herbaceous (non-
woody) plants, it produces all, or almost all, of the plant body. 
Woody plants, however, also grow in circumference in the parts 
of stems and roots that no longer grow in length. This growth in 
thickness, known as secondary growth, is made possible by 
lateral meristems: the vascular cambium and cork cambium. 
These cylinders of dividing cells extend along the length of 
roots and stems. The vascular cambium adds vascular tissue 
called secondary xylem (wood) and secondary phloem. Most of 
the thickening is from secondary xylem. The cork cambium 
replaces the epidermis with the thicker, tougher periderm.
Cells in apical and lateral meristems divide frequently 
during the growing season, generating additional cells. Some 
new cells remain in the meristem and produce more cells, 
while others differentiate and are incorporated into tissues 
and organs. Cells that remain as sources of new cells have tra-
ditionally been called initials but are increasingly being called 
stem cells to correspond to animal stem cells that also divide 
and remain functionally undifferentiated.
Cells displaced from the meristem may divide several 
more times as they differentiate into mature cells. During 
primary growth, these cells give rise to three tissues called 
primary meristems—the protoderm, ground meristem, 
and  procambium—that will produce, respectively, the three 
mature tissues of a root or shoot: the dermal, ground, and vas-
cular tissues. The lateral meristems in woody plants also have 
stem cells, which give rise to all secondary growth.
The relationship between primary and secondary growth is 
seen in the winter twig of a deciduous tree. At the shoot tip is 
the dormant apical bud, enclosed by scales that protect its apical 
meristem (Figure 35.12). In spring, the bud sheds its scales and 
begins a new spurt of primary growth, producing a series of nodes 
CONCEPT 35.2
 Bud scale
Apical bud
This year’s growth
(one year old)
Last year’s growth
(two years old)
Growth of two
years ago
(three years old)
Axillary buds
Leaf
scar
Bud
scar
Internode
Leaf scar
Bud scar
Stem
Node One-year-old
branch formed
from axillary bud
near shoot tip
Leaf scar
b Figure 35.12  
Three years’ 
growth in a 
winter twig.
CONCEPT CHECK 35.2
1. Would primary and secondary growth ever occur simultane-
ously in the same plant?
2. Roots and stems grow indeterminately, but leaves do not. 
How might this benefit the plant?
3. WHAT IF? After growing carrots for one season, a gardener 
decides that the carrots are too small. Since carrots are bien-
nials, the gardener leaves the crop in the ground for a sec-
ond year, thinking the carrot roots will grow larger. Is this a 
good idea? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   820 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 822 ===

Shoot apical
meristem
Root apical
meristem
All vascular plants have primary growth: growth in length. Woody plants also have 
secondary growth: growth in thickness. As you study the diagrams, visualize how 
shoots and roots grow longer and thicker.
Cell division in
apical meristem
Leaf primordia
Daughter cell in
primary meristem
Cell division in
primary meristem
Growing cells in
primary meristem
Differentiated cells
(for example,
vessel elements)
Youngest
differentiated
cells
Completed primary growth
Lateral
meristems
Direction of secondary growth
Vascular cambium cell
Oldest
xylem cell
Oldest
phloem cell
Youngest
xylem cell
Youngest
phloem cell
Cork
cells
Cork cambium cell
Older
differentiated
cells
Primary 
meristems
Mature 
tissues
Dermal Ground Vascular
Apical meristem cells are undifferentiated. When they divide,
some daughter cells remain in the apical meristem, ensuring
a continuing population of undifferentiated cells. Other
daughter cells become partly differentiated as primary
meristem cells. After dividing and growing in length, they
become fully differentiated cells in the mature tissues.
Growth
Time
Cell
division
Cell
growth
Vascular cambium
Cork cambium
Direction of secondary growth
Vascular cambium cell
Time
Direction of secondary growth
Time
X1
P1 P2X1 X2
P1X1 X2
P1 X1
Cork cambium cell
C1
C1 C2
Primary Growth (growth in length)
Primary growth is made possible by apical 
meristems at the tips of shoots and roots. 
Secondary Growth (growth in thickness)
Secondary growth is made possible by two lateral
meristems extending along the length of a shoot or
root where primary growth has ceased.
The addition of elongated, differentiated cells
lengthens a stem (as shown here) or root.
Cutaway view of primary growth
in a shoot tip
The lateral meristems, 
called the vascular
cambium and cork 
cambium, are cylinders
of dividing cells that are 
one cell thick.
Addition of secondary xylem
and phloem cells: When a
vascular cambium cell divides,
sometimes one daughter cell
becomes a secondary xylem cell
(X) to the inside of the cambium
or a secondary phloem cell (P) to
the outside. Although xylem and
phloem cells are shown being
added equally here, usually many
more xylem cells are produced.
Addition of cork cells: 
When a cork cambium cell
divides, sometimes one daughter
cell becomes a cork cell (C) to
the outside of the cambium.
When the vascular cambium and
cork cambium become active in a
stem (or root), primary growth
has ceased in that area.
A stem (or root) thickens as
secondary xylem, secondary 
phloem, and cork cells are
added. Most of the cells are 
secondary xylem (wood).
Increased circumference:
When a cambium cell
divides, sometimes both
daughter cells remain in
the cambium and grow,
increasing the cambium
circumference.
1.A thimble-like root cap protects each root 
apical meristem. Draw and label a simple 
outline of a root divided into four sections: 
root cap (bottom), root apical meristem, 
primary meristems, and mature tissues.
2.Draw the row of cells from the
boxed area below and label the
vascular cambium cell (V), 5 xylem
cells from oldest (X1) to youngest
(X5), and 3 phloem cells (P1 to P3).
Show what happens after growth
continues by drawing and labeling a
row with twice as many xylem and
         phloem cells. How does the               
             vascular cambium’s
               location change?
 Mastering Biology Animation:  
Primary and Secondary Growth
 821
/uni25BC Figure 35.11  VISUALIZING PRIMARY AND SECONDARY GROWTH
 Instructors: Additional questions related 
to this Visualizing Figure can be assigned in 
Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   821 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 823 ===

822 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
Typically, a few millimeters behind the tip of the root is the 
zone of elongation, where most of the growth occurs as root 
cells elongate—sometimes to more than ten times their origi-
nal length. Cell elongation in this zone pushes the tip farther 
into the soil. Meanwhile, the root apical meristem keeps add-
ing cells to the younger end of the zone of elongation. Even 
before the root cells finish lengthening, many begin spe-
cializing in structure and function. As this occurs, the three 
primary meristems—the protoderm, ground meristem, and 
procambium—become evident. In the zone of differentiation, 
or zone of maturation, cells complete their differentiation 
and become distinct cell types.
The protoderm, the outermost primary meristem, gives 
rise to the epidermis, a single layer of cuticle-free cells cover-
ing the root. Root hairs are the most prominent feature of 
the root epidermis. These modified epidermal cells function 
in the absorption of water and minerals. Root hairs  typically 
only live a few weeks but together make up 70–90% of the 
total root surface area. It has been estimated that a four-
month-old rye plant has about 14 billion root hairs. Laid 
end to end, the root hairs of a single rye plant would cover 
10,000 km, one-quarter the length of the equator.
Sandwiched between the protoderm and the procambium 
is the ground meristem, which gives rise to mature ground 
tissue. The ground tissue of roots, consisting mostly of paren-
chyma cells, is found in the cortex, the region between the 
vascular tissue and epidermis. In addition to storing carbohy-
drates, cells in the cortex transport water and salts from the 
root hairs to the center of the root. The cortex also allows for 
extracellular diffusion of water, minerals, and oxygen from the 
root hairs inward because there are large spaces between cells. 
The innermost layer of the cortex is called the endodermis, 
a cylinder one cell thick that forms the boundary with the 
vascular cylinder. The endodermis is a selective barrier that 
regulates passage of substances from the soil into the vascular 
cylinder (see Figure 36.9).
The procambium gives rise to the vascular cylinder, which 
consists of a solid core of xylem and phloem tissues sur-
rounded by a cell layer called the pericycle. In most eudicot 
roots, the xylem has a starlike appearance in cross section, 
and the phloem occupies the indentations between the 
arms of the xylem “star” (Figure 35.14a). In many monocot 
roots, the vascular tissue consists of a core of undifferentiated 
parenchyma cells surrounded by a ring of alternating xylem 
and phloem tissues (Figure 35.14b).
By increasing the length of roots, primary growth 
facilitates their penetration and exploration of the soil. If a 
resource-rich pocket is located in the soil, the branching of 
roots may be stimulated. Branching, too, is a form of primary 
growth. Lateral (branch) roots arise from meristematically 
active regions of the pericycle, the outermost cell layer in the 
vascular cylinder, which is adjacent to and just inside the 
endodermis (see Figure 35.14). The emerging lateral roots 
Primary growth lengthens  
roots and shoots
Primary growth arises directly from cells produced by apical 
meristems. In herbaceous plants, almost the entire plant is 
created through primary growth, whereas in woody plants 
only the nonwoody, more recently formed parts of the plant 
represent primary growth. Although both roots and shoots 
lengthen as a result of cells derived from apical meristems, the 
details of their primary growth differ in many ways.
Primary Growth of Roots
The entire biomass of a primary root is derived from the 
root apical meristem. The root apical meristem also makes 
a thimble-like root cap, which protects the delicate apical 
meristem as the root pushes through the abrasive soil. The 
root cap secretes a polysaccharide slime that lubricates the 
soil around the tip of the root. Growth occurs just behind the 
tip in three overlapping zones of cells at successive stages of 
primary growth. These are the zones of cell division, elonga-
tion, and differentiation (Figure 35.13).
The zone of cell division includes the stem cells of the root 
apical meristem and their immediate products. New root cells 
are produced in this region, including cells of the root cap. 
CONCEPT 35.3
. Figure 35.13 Primary growth of a eudicot root. In the 
micrograph, mitotic cells in the apical meristem are revealed by 
staining for cyclin, a protein involved in cell division (LM).
Vascular cylinderCortex
Epidermis
Protoderm
Primary meristems
(elongating, partly 
differentiated cells)
Procambium
Ground
meristem
Zone of
elongation
Zone of
differentiation
Root apical meristem
(undifferentiated cells)
Zone of cell
division
(including
apical
meristem)
Root hair
Root cap
70 om
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Mitotic
cells
Key
to labels
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   822 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 824 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 823
disruptively push through the outer tissues until they emerge 
from the established root (Figure 35.15).
Primary Growth of Shoots
The entire biomass of a primary shoot—all its leaves and stems—
derives from its shoot apical meristem, a dome-shaped mass of 
dividing cells at the shoot tip (Figure 35.16). The shoot apical 
meristem is a delicate structure protected by the leaves of the api-
cal bud. These young leaves are spaced close together because the 
. Figure 35.14 Organization of primary tissues in young 
roots. Parts (a) and (b) show cross sections of the roots of a 
Ranunculus (buttercup) species and Zea mays (maize), respectively. 
These represent two basic patterns of root organization, of which 
there are many variations, depending on the plant species (all LMs).
Key
to labels
(b) Root with parenchyma in the center (typical of
monocots). The stele of many monocot roots 
is a vascular cylinder with a core of parenchyma
surrounded by a ring of xylem and a ring of phloem.
100 om
Endodermis
Pericycle
Core of
parenchyma
cells
Xylem
Phloem
Epidermis
Cortex
Vascular
cylinder
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Key
to labels
70 om
Pericycle
Xylem
Phloem
Endodermis
Endodermis
Pericycle
Xylem
Phloem
100 om
Epidermis
Cortex
Vascular
cylinder
(a) Root with xylem and phloem in the center (typical 
of eudicots). In the roots of typical gymnosperms and 
eudicots, as well as some monocots, the stele is a 
vascular cylinder appearing in cross section as a lobed 
core of xylem with phloem between the lobes.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Root Cross Sections
. Figure 35.15 The formation of a lateral root. A lateral root 
originates in the pericycle, the outermost layer of the vascular 
cylinder of a root, and destructively pushes through the outer 
tissues before emerging. In this light micrograph, the view of the 
original root is a cross section, but the view of the lateral root is a 
longitudinal section (a view along the length of the lateral root).
Emerging lateral root
Vascular cylinder
Pericycle
Cortex 
Epidermis
100 om
DRAW IT Draw what the original root and lateral root would look like 
when viewed from the side, labeling both roots.
. Figure 35.16 The shoot tip. Leaf primordia arise from the 
flanks of the dome of the apical meristem. This is a longitudinal 
section of the shoot tip of Coleus (LM).
0.25 mm0.25 mm
Procambium
Young leaf
Shoot apical 
meristem
Protoderm
Leaf primordia
Ground
meristem
Axillary bud
meristems
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   823 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 825 ===

824 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
internodes are very short. Shoot elongation is due to the length-
ening of internode cells below the shoot tip. As with the root api-
cal meristem, the shoot apical meristem gives rise to three types 
of primary meristems in the shoot—the protoderm, ground 
meristem, and procambium. These three primary meristems in 
turn give rise to the mature primary tissues of the shoot.
The branching of shoots, which is also part of primary 
growth, arises from the activation of axillary buds, each of 
which has its own shoot apical meristem. Because of chemi-
cal communication by plant hormones, the closer an axillary 
bud is to an active apical bud, the more inhibited it is, a phe-
nomenon called apical dominance. (The specific hormonal 
changes underlying apical dominance are discussed in Concept 
39.2.) If an animal eats the end of the shoot or if shading results 
in the light being more intense on the side of the shoot, the 
chemical communication underlying apical dominance is dis-
rupted. As a result, the axillary buds break dormancy and start 
to grow. Released from dormancy, an axillary bud eventually 
gives rise to a lateral shoot, complete with its own apical bud, 
leaves, and axillary buds. When gardeners prune shrubs and 
pinch back houseplants, they are reducing the number of apical 
buds a plant has, thereby allowing branches to develop and giv-
ing the plants a fuller, bushier appearance.
Stem Growth and Anatomy
The stem is covered by an epidermis that is usually one cell 
thick and covered with a waxy cuticle that prevents water 
loss. Some examples of specialized epidermal cells in the stem 
include guard cells and trichomes.
The ground tissue of stems consists mostly of paren-
chyma cells. However, collenchyma cells just beneath the 
epidermis strengthen many stems during primary growth. 
Sclerenchyma cells, especially fiber cells, also provide support 
in those parts of the stems that are no longer elongating.
Vascular tissue runs the length of a stem in vascular 
bundles. Unlike lateral roots, which arise from vascular tissue 
deep within a root and disrupt the vascular cylinder, cor-
tex, and epidermis as they emerge (see Figure 35.15), lateral 
shoots develop from axillary bud meristems on the stem’s 
surface and do not disrupt other tissues (see Figure 35.16). 
Near the soil surface, in the transition zone between shoot 
and root, the bundled vascular arrangement of the stem con-
verges with the solid vascular cylinder of the root.
The vascular tissue of stems in most eudicot species consists 
of vascular bundles arranged in a ring (Figure 35.17a). The 
xylem in each bundle faces the pith, and the phloem in each 
bundle faces the cortex. In most monocot stems, the vascular 
bundles do not form a ring but have a more scattered arrange-
ment in the ground tissue (Figure 35.17b).
Leaf Growth and Anatomy
Figure 35.18 provides an overview of leaf anatomy. Leaves 
develop from leaf primordia (singular, primordium), projec-
tions shaped like a cat’s ear that emerge along the sides of the 
. Figure 35.17 Organization of primary tissues in young stems.
Key
to labels
Epidermis
Epidermis
Ground tissue
connecting
pith to cortex
Pith
Cortex
Vascular
bundle
Sclerenchyma
(fiber cells)
XylemPhloem
1 mm
1 mm
(a)
Ground
tissue
Vascular
bundles
Cross section of stem with vascular bundles forming a 
ring (typical of eudicots). Ground tissue toward the 
inside is called pith, and ground tissue toward the outside is 
called cortex (LM).
(b)Cross section of stem with scattered vascular bundles 
(typical of monocots). In such an arrangement, ground tissue is 
not partitioned into pith and cortex (LM).
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Key
to labels
VISUAL SKILLS Compare the locations of the vascular bundles in 
eudicot and monocot stems. Then explain why the terms pith and cortex 
are not used in describing the ground tissue of monocot stems.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Stem Cross Sections
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   824 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 826 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 825
shoot apical meristem (see Figure 35.16). Unlike roots and 
stems, secondary growth in leaves is minor or nonexistent. As 
with roots and stems, the three primary meristems give rise to 
the tissues of the mature organ.
The leaf epidermis is covered by a waxy cuticle that greatly 
reduces water loss except where it is interrupted by stomata 
(singular, stoma), which allow exchange of CO2 and O2 
between the surrounding air and the photosynthetic cells 
inside the leaf. In addition to regulating CO2 uptake for pho-
tosynthesis, stomata are major avenues for the evaporative 
loss of water. The term stoma can refer to the stomatal pore or 
to the entire stomatal complex consisting of a pore flanked 
by the two specialized epidermal cells known as guard cells, 
which regulate the opening and closing of the pore. (We will 
discuss stomata in detail in Concept 36.4.)
The leaf’s ground tissue, called the mesophyll (from the 
Greek mesos, middle, and phyll, leaf), is sandwiched between 
the upper and lower epidermal layers. Mesophyll consists 
mainly of parenchyma cells specialized for photosynthesis. 
The mesophyll in many eudicot leaves has two distinct layers: 
palisade and spongy. Palisade mesophyll, located beneath the 
upper epidermis, consists of one or more layers of elongated, 
chloroplast-rich cells that are specialized for light capture. 
Spongy mesophyll, located inward from the lower epidermis, 
consists of irregularly shaped cells that have fewer chloro-
plasts. These cells form a labyrinth of air spaces through which 
. Figure 35.18 Leaf anatomy.
100 om
Cuticle
Cuticle
Guard
cells
Sclerenchyma
fibers
Stoma
Epidermal
cell
Stomatal
pore
Lower
epidermis
Upper
epidermis
Spongy
mesophyll
Palisade
mesophyll
Bundle-
sheath
cell
Xylem
Phloem
Guard cellsVein Air spaces
(b) Surface view of a spiderwort
(Tradescantia) leaf (LM)
(c) Cross section of a lilac
(Syringa) leaf (LM)
(a) Cutaway drawing of leaf tissues
Guard 
cells
50 om
Vein
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Key
to labels
 Mastering Biology Animation: Leaf Anatomy
CO2 and O2 circulate to and from the palisade layer. The air 
spaces are particularly large in the vicinity of stomata, where 
CO2 is taken up from the outside air and O2 is released.
The vascular tissue of each leaf is continuous with the 
vascular tissue of the stem. Veins subdivide repeatedly and 
branch throughout the mesophyll. This network brings 
xylem and phloem into close contact with the photosyn-
thetic tissue, which obtains water and minerals from the 
xylem and loads its sugars and other organic products into 
the phloem for transport to other parts of the plant. The vas-
cular structure also functions as a framework that reinforces 
the shape of the leaf. Each vein is enclosed by a protective 
bundle sheath, a layer of cells that regulates the movement of 
substances between the vascular tissue and the mesophyll. 
Bundle-sheath cells are very prominent in leaves of species 
that carry out C4 photosynthesis (see Concept 11.5).
CONCEPT CHECK 35.3
1. Contrast primary growth in roots and shoots.
2. WHAT IF? A fossil leaf from a region that in the geological 
past was intermittently very dry and very swampy has sto-
mata only on its upper epidermis. Was the leaf from a des-
ert plant or from a floating aquatic plant? Explain.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS How are root hairs and microvilli 
analogous structures? (See Figure 7.8 and the discussion of 
analogy in Concept 22.2.)
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   825 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 827 ===

826 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
Secondary growth consists of the tissues produced by the 
vascular cambium and cork cambium. The vascular cam-
bium adds secondary xylem (wood) and secondary phloem, 
thereby increasing vascular flow and support for the shoots. 
The cork cambium produces a tough, thick covering of waxy 
cells that protect the stem from water loss and from invasion 
by insects, bacteria, and fungi.
In woody plants, primary growth and secondary growth 
occur simultaneously. As primary growth adds leaves and 
lengthens stems and roots in the younger regions of a plant, 
secondary growth increases the diameter of stems and roots 
in older regions where primary growth has ceased. The pro-
cess is similar in shoots and roots. Figure 35.19 provides an 
overview of growth in a woody stem.
Secondary growth increases  
the diameter of stems and roots 
in woody plants
Many land plants display secondary growth, the growth in 
thickness produced by lateral meristems. The advent of second-
ary growth during plant evolution allowed the production of 
novel plant forms ranging from massive forest trees to woody 
vines. All gymnosperm species and many eudicot species 
undergo secondary growth, but it is unusual in monocots. It 
occurs in stems and roots of woody plants, but rarely in leaves.
CONCEPT 35.4
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough 
Animation: Secondary Growth
Growth
Epidermis
Cortex
Vascular 
cambium
Primary 
xylem
Periderm
(mainly cork
cambia
and cork)
Pith
Primary
phloem
Pith
Vascular
 ray
Primary xylem
Primary
xylem
Secondary xylem
Secondary
xylem (two
years of
production)
Vascular cambium
Most recent
cork cambium Cork
Bark
Layers of
periderm
Secondary phloem
Secondary phloem
Vascular cambium
Vascular cambium
Primary phloem
Primary phloem
First cork cambium
Cortex
Epidermis
Primary
phloem
Secondary
phloem
Vascular
cambium
Secondary
xylem
Primary
xylem
Pith
Cork
Growth
1
1
2
3
4
7
5
9
8
2
3
4
5
6
6
7
8
Primary growth from the activity of the 
apical meristem is complete here. The 
vascular cambium has formed, and its 
cell divisions will give rise to the bulk 
of secondary growth.
Although primary growth continues in 
the apical bud, only secondary growth 
occurs in this region. The stem thickens 
as the vascular cambium forms 
secondary xylem to the inside and 
secondary phloem to the outside.
Some stem cells of the vascular cambium 
give rise to vascular rays.
As the vascular cambium’s diameter 
increases, the secondary phloem and 
other tissues external to the cambium 
can’t keep pace because their cells no 
longer divide. As a result, these 
tissues, including the epidermis, will 
eventually rupture. A second lateral 
meristem, the cork cambium, develops 
from parenchyma cells in the cortex. 
The cork cambium produces cork cells, 
which replace the epidermis.
In year 2 of secondary growth, the vascular 
cambium produces more secondary xylem 
and phloem. Most of the thickening is 
from secondary xylem. Meanwhile, the 
cork cambium produces more cork.
As the stem’s diameter increases, the 
outermost tissues exterior to the cork 
cambium rupture and are sloughed off. 
In many cases, the cork cambium 
re-forms deeper in the cortex. When 
none of the cortex is left, the cambium 
develops from phloem parenchyma cells.
Each cork cambium and the tissues it 
produces form a layer of periderm.
Bark consists of all tissues exterior to 
the vascular cambium.
9
. Figure 35.19 Secondary growth  
of a woody stem.
VISUAL SKILLS Based on the diagram, explain how the vascular cambium 
causes some tissues to rupture.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   826 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 828 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 827
water but provide more support. Because there is a marked 
contrast between the large cells of the new early wood and the 
smaller cells of the late wood of the previous growing season, a 
year’s growth appears as a distinct growth ring in cross sections of 
most tree trunks and roots. Therefore, researchers can estimate a 
tree’s age by counting growth rings. Dendrochronology is the sci-
ence of analyzing tree growth ring patterns. Growth rings vary 
in thickness, depending on seasonal growth. Trees grow well 
in wet and warm years but may grow hardly at all in cold or dry 
years. Since a thick ring indicates a warm year and a thin ring 
indicates a cold or dry one, scientists use ring patterns to study 
climate changes (Figure 35.21).
As a tree or woody shrub ages, older layers of secondary 
xylem no longer transport water and minerals (a solution 
The Vascular Cambium and  
Secondary Vascular Tissue
The vascular cambium, a cylinder of meristematic cells only 
one cell thick, is wholly responsible for the production of sec-
ondary vascular tissue. In a typical woody stem, the vascular 
cambium is located outside the pith and primary xylem and to 
the inside of the primary phloem and the cortex. In a typical 
woody root, the vascular cambium forms exterior to the pri-
mary xylem and interior to the primary phloem and pericycle.
In cross section, the vascular cambium appears as a ring of 
meristematic cells (see step 4 of Figure 35.19). As these cells 
divide, they increase the cambium’s circumference and add 
secondary xylem to the inside and secondary phloem to the 
outside. Each ring is larger than the previous ring, increasing 
the diameter of roots and stems.
Some of the stem cells in the vascular cambium are elongated 
and oriented with their long axis parallel to the axis of the stem 
or root. The cells they produce give rise to mature cells such as 
the tracheids, vessel elements, and fibers of the xylem, as well 
as the sieve-tube elements, companion cells, axially oriented 
parenchyma, and fibers of the phloem. Other stem cells in the 
vascular cambium are shorter and are oriented perpendicular to 
the axis of the stem or root: they give rise to vascular rays—radial 
files of mostly parenchyma cells that connect the secondary 
xylem and phloem (see step 3 of Figure 35.19). These cells move 
water and nutrients between the secondary xylem and phloem, 
store carbohydrates and other reserves, and aid in wound repair.
As secondary growth continues, layers of secondary xylem 
(wood) accumulate, consisting mainly of tracheids and vessel ele-
ments (see Figure 35.10), as well as fibers. In most species of gym-
nosperms, tracheids are the only water-conducting cells. Most 
angiosperms also have vessel elements. The walls of secondary 
xylem cells are heavily lignified, giving wood its hardness and 
strength.
In temperate regions, wood that develops early in the spring, 
known as early (or spring) wood, usually has secondary xylem 
cells with large diameters and thin cell walls (Figure 35.20).  
This structure maximizes delivery of water to leaves. Wood 
produced later in the growing season is called late (or summer) 
wood. It has thick-walled cells that do not transport as much  
. Figure 35.20 Cross section of a three-year-old Tilia (linden) 
stem. (LM)
Bark
Vascular ray
Secondary xylemEarly wood
Late wood
Vascular cambium
Secondary phloem
Cork
cambium
Cork
Periderm
Growth ring
1 mm
1.4 mm
Application Dendrochronology, the science of analyzing 
growth rings, is useful in studying climate change. Most 
scientists attribute recent global warming to the burning 
of fossil fuels and release of CO2 and other greenhouse 
gases, whereas a small minority think it is a natural varia-
tion. Studying climate patterns requires comparing past and 
present temperatures, but instrumental climate records span 
only the last two centuries and apply only to some regions. 
By examining growth rings of Mongolian conifers dat-
ing back to the mid-1500s, Gordon C. Jacoby and Rosanne 
D’Arrigo, of the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, and col-
leagues sought to learn whether Mongolia has experienced 
similar warm periods in the past.
Technique R e s e a r c h e r s  c a n  a n a l y z e  p a t t e r n s  o f  r i n g s  i n  l i v-
ing and dead trees. They can even study wood used for build-
ing long ago by matching samples with those from naturally 
situated specimens of overlapping age. Core samples, each 
about the diameter of a pencil, are taken from the bark to the 
center of the trunk. Each sample is dried and sanded to reveal 
the rings. By comparing, aligning, and averaging many sam-
ples from the conifers, the researchers compiled a chronology. 
The trees became a chronicle of environmental change.
Results This graph summarizes a composite record of the 
ring-width indexes for the Mongolian conifers from 1550 
to 1993. The higher indexes indicate wider rings and higher 
temperatures.
0.5
0
1
1.5
2
1600 1700 1800 1900 2000
Year
Ring-width indexes
Data from G. C. Jacoby et al., Mongolian tree rings and 20th-century warming, 
Science 273:771–773 (1996).
INTERPRET THE DATA What does the graph indicate about 
environmental change during the period 1550–1993?
Using Dendrochronology to Study Climate
. Figure 35.21 Research Method
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   827 3/14/20   3:58 AM

=== SIDE 829 ===

Only the youngest secondary phloem, closest to the vascu-
lar cambium, functions in sugar transport. As a stem or root 
increases in circumference, the older secondary phloem is 
sloughed off, which is one reason secondary phloem does not 
accumulate as extensively as secondary xylem.
The Cork Cambium and  
the Production of Periderm
During the early stages of secondary growth, the epidermis 
is pushed outward, causing it to split, dry, and fall off the 
stem or root. It is replaced by tissues produced by the first 
cork cambium, a cylinder of dividing cells that arises in the 
outer cortex of stems (see Figure 35.19) and in the pericycle in 
roots. The cork cambium gives rise to cork cells that accumu-
late to the outside of the cork cambium. As cork cells mature, 
they deposit a waxy, hydrophobic material called suberin 
in their walls before dying. Because cork cells have suberin 
and are usually compacted together, most of the periderm is 
impermeable to water and gases, unlike the epidermis. Cork 
thus functions as a barrier that helps protect the stem or root 
from water loss, physical damage, and pathogens. It should 
be noted that “cork” is commonly and incorrectly referred to 
as “bark.” In plant biology, bark includes all tissues exter-
nal to the vascular cambium. Its main components are the 
secondary phloem (produced by the vascular cambium) and, 
external to that, the most recent periderm and all the older 
layers of periderm (see Figure 35.22). As this process contin-
ues, older layers of periderm are sloughed off, as evident in 
the cracked, peeling exteriors of many tree trunks.
How can living cells in the interior tissues of woody organs 
absorb oxygen and respire if they are surrounded by a waxy 
periderm? Dotting the periderm are small, raised areas called 
lenticels, in which there is more space between cork cells, 
enabling living cells within a woody stem or root to exchange 
gases with the outside air. Lenticels often appear as horizontal 
slits, as shown on the stem in Figure 35.19.
Figure 35.24 summarizes the relationships between the 
primary and secondary tissues of a woody shoot.
Evolution of Secondary Growth
EVOLUTION Surprisingly, some insights into the evolution 
of secondary growth have been achieved by studying the her-
baceous plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Researchers have found 
that they can stimulate some secondary growth in Arabidopsis 
stems by adding weights to the plant. These findings suggest 
that weight carried by the stem activates a developmental 
program leading to wood formation. Moreover, several 
developmental genes that regulate shoot apical meristems in 
Arabidopsis have been found to regulate vascular cambium 
activity in poplar (Populus) trees. This suggests that the pro-
cesses of primary and secondary growth are evolutionarily 
more closely related than was previously thought.
called xylem sap). These layers are called heartwood because 
they are closer to the center of a stem or root (Figure 35.22). 
The newest, outer layers of secondary xylem still transport 
xylem sap and are therefore known as sapwood. Sapwood 
allows a large tree to survive even if the center of its trunk is 
hollow (Figure 35.23). Because each new layer of secondary 
xylem has a larger circumference, secondary growth enables 
the xylem to transport more sap each year, supplying an 
increasing number of leaves. Heartwood is generally darker 
than sapwood because of resins and other compounds that 
permeate the cell cavities and help protect the core of the tree 
from fungi and wood-boring insects.
. Figure 35.22 Anatomy of a tree trunk.
Heartwood
Sapwood
Vascular cambium
Secondary phloem
Layers of periderm
Bark
Vascular
ray
Growth 
ring
Secondary
xylem
b Figure 35.23 Is this tree 
living or dead? The Wawona 
Sequoia tunnel in Yosemite 
National Park in California 
was cut in 1881 as a tourist 
attraction. This giant sequoia 
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) 
lived for another 88 years 
before falling during a severe 
winter. It was 71.3 m tall and 
estimated to be 2,100 years 
old. Though conservation 
policies today would forbid 
the mutilation of such an 
important specimen, the 
Wawona Sequoia did teach 
a valuable botanical lesson: 
Trees can endure the excision 
of large portions of their 
heartwood for decades.
VISUAL SKILLS Name in 
sequence the tissues that were 
destroyed as the lumberjacks 
excavated through the base of 
the tree to its center. Refer also 
to Figure 35.19.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   828 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 830 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 829
. Figure 35.24 A summary of primary and secondary growth in a woody shoot. Woody roots have the 
same meristems and tissues. However, the ground tissue of a root is not divided into pith and cortex, and the cork 
cambium arises instead from the pericycle, the outermost layer of the vascular cylinder.
Dermal Ground Vascular
Primary meristems Primary tissues Lateral meristems Secondary tissues
Apical 
meristem
of stem
Protoderm
Ground
meristem
Procambium Vascular cambium
Epidermis
Periderm
Cork cambium Cork 
Ground
tissue
Pith
Cortex
Primary phloem
Primary xylem
Secondary phloem
Secondary xylem
CONCEPT CHECK 35.4
CONCEPT 35.5
Growth, morphogenesis,  
and cell differentiation  
produce the plant body
The specific series of changes by which cells form tissues, 
organs, and organisms is called development. Development 
unfolds according to the genetic information that an organ-
ism inherits from its parents but is also influenced by the 
external environment. A single genotype can produce dif-
ferent phenotypes in different environments. For example, 
the aquatic plant Cabomba aquatica forms two very differ-
ent types of leaves, depending on whether the shoot apical 
meristem is submerged (Figure 35.25). This ability to alter 
form in response to local environmental conditions is called 
developmental plasticity. Dramatic examples of plasticity, as 
in Cabomba, are much more common in plants than in ani-
mals and may help compensate for plants’ inability to escape 
adverse conditions by moving.
. Figure 35.25 Developmental plasticity in the aquatic 
plant Cabomba aquatica. The underwater leaves of Cabomba 
are feathery, an adaptation that protects them from damage by 
lessening their resistance to moving water. In contrast, the surface 
leaves are pads that aid in flotation. The two leaf types have 
genetically identical cells, but their different environments result in 
the turning on or off of different genes during leaf development.
Surface leaf
Underwater leaves
1. A label with small teeth that can bite into the bark is 
attached flat onto a tree. A few years later, the label falls 
off. Why?
2. Vascular rays are radial files of mostly parenchyma cells that 
are oriented perpendicular to the axis of the stem. What 
roles do they play?
3. Would you expect a tropical tree to have distinct growth 
rings? Why or why not?
4. WHAT IF? If a complete ring of bark is removed from around 
a tree trunk (a technique called girdling), would the tree die 
slowly (in weeks) or quickly (in days)? Explain why.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   829 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 831 ===

830 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
has been used successfully in Arabidopsis. By disrupting or 
“knocking out” a specific gene, scientists can garner impor-
tant information about the gene’s normal function.
Large-scale projects are under way to determine the func-
tion of every gene in Arabidopsis. By identifying each gene’s 
function and tracking every biochemical pathway, research-
ers aim to determine the blueprints for plant development, 
a major goal of systems biology. It may one day be possible 
to make a computer-generated “virtual plant” that enables 
researchers to visualize which genes are activated in different 
parts of the plant as the plant develops.
Basic research on model organisms such as Arabidopsis 
has accelerated the pace of discovery in the plant sciences, 
including the identification of the complex genetic pathways 
underlying plant structure. As you read more about this, you’ll  
be able to appreciate not only the power of studying model  
organisms but also the history of investigation that underpins  
all modern plant research.
The three overlapping processes involved in the develop-
ment of a multicellular organism are growth, morphogenesis, 
and cell differentiation. Growth is an irreversible increase in 
size. Morphogenesis (from the Greek morphê, shape, and genesis, 
creation) is the process that gives a tissue, organ, or organism its 
shape and determines the positions of cell types. Cell differentia-
tion is the process by which cells with the same genes become dif-
ferent from one another. We’ll examine these three processes in 
turn, but first we’ll discuss how applying techniques of modern 
molecular biology to model organisms, particularly Arabidopsis 
thaliana, has revolutionized the study of plant development.
Model Organisms:  
Revolutionizing the Study of Plants
As in other branches of biology, techniques of molecular 
biology and a focus on model organisms such as Arabidopsis 
thaliana have catalyzed a research explosion in the last few 
decades. Arabidopsis, a tiny weed in the mustard family, has no 
inherent agricultural value but is a favored model organism of 
plant geneticists and molecular biologists for many reasons. 
It is so small that thousands of plants can be cultivated in a 
few square meters of lab space. It also has a short generation 
time, taking about six weeks for a seed to grow into a mature 
plant that produces more seeds. This rapid maturation enables 
biologists to conduct genetic cross experiments in a relatively 
short time. One plant can produce over 5,000 seeds, another 
property that makes Arabidopsis useful for genetic analysis.
Beyond these basic traits, the plant’s genome makes it par-
ticularly well suited for analysis by molecular genetic meth-
ods. The Arabidopsis genome, which includes about 27,000 
protein-encoding genes, is among the smallest known in 
plants. Furthermore, the plant has only five pairs of chromo-
somes, making it easier for geneticists to locate specific genes. 
Because Arabidopsis has such a small genome, it was the first 
plant to have its entire genome sequenced.
The natural range of Arabidopsis includes varied climates 
and elevations, from the high mountains of Central Asia to 
the European Atlantic coast, and from North Africa to the 
Arctic Circle. These local varieties can differ markedly in out-
ward appearance (Figure 35.26). Genome-sequencing efforts 
are being expanded to include hundreds of populations of 
Arabidopsis from throughout its natural range in Eurasia. 
Contained in the genomes of these populations is information 
about evolutionary adaptations that enabled Arabidopsis to 
expand its range into new environments following the retreat 
of the last ice age. This information may provide plant breed-
ers with new insights and strategies for crop improvement.
Another property that makes Arabidopsis attractive to 
molecular biologists is that its cells can be easily transformed 
with transgenes, genes from a different organism that are sta-
bly introduced into the genome of another. CRISPR technol-
ogy (see Figure 19.14), which is rapidly becoming the tech-
nique of choice for creating plants with specific mutations, 
. Figure 35.26 Variations in leaf arrangement, leaf shape, 
and shoot growth between different populations of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Information in the genomes of these 
populations may provide insights into strategies for expanding crop 
production into new environments.
Leaf arrangements (viewed from top)
Shoot growth
Leaf shapes
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Joanne Chory:  
Sequencing the Arabidopsis genome
Growth: Cell Division and Cell Expansion
Cell division enhances the potential for growth by increas-
ing the number of cells, but plant growth itself is brought 
about by cell enlargement. The process of plant cell divi-
sion is described more fully in Chapter 12 (see Figure 12.10), 
and Chapter 39 discusses the process of cell elongation (see 
Figure 39.7). Here we are concerned with how cell division 
and enlargement contribute to plant form.
Cell Division
The new cell walls that bisect plant cells during cytokinesis 
develop from the cell plate (see Figure 12.10). The precise plane 
of cell division, determined during late interphase, usually cor-
responds to the shortest path that halves the cytoplasm of the 
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   830 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 832 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 831
axis. For example, cells near the tip of the root may elongate 
20 times or more their original length, with relatively little 
increase in width. The orientation of cellulose microfibrils in 
the innermost layers of the cell wall causes this differential 
growth. The microfibrils do not stretch, so the cell expands 
mainly perpendicular to the main orientation of the microfi-
brils, as shown in Figure 35.28. A leading hypothesis proposes 
that microtubules positioned just beneath the plasma mem-
brane organize the cellulose-synthesizing enzyme complexes 
and guide their movement through the plasma membrane as 
they create the microfibrils that form much of the cell wall.
parent cell. However, during certain points in development the 
cytoplasm may not be divided equally, resulting in one daugh-
ter cell being larger than the other, even though they have the 
same number of chromosomes. Such cases of asymmetrical cell 
division usually signal a key event in development. For exam-
ple, the formation of guard cells involves an asymmetrical cell 
division. An epidermal cell divides asymmetrically, forming a 
large cell that remains an undifferentiated epidermal cell and 
a small cell that becomes the guard cell “mother cell.” Guard 
cells form when this small mother cell divides in a plane per-
pendicular to the first cell division (Figure 35.27). Thus, asym-
metrical cell division generates cells with different fates—that 
is, cells that mature into different types.
Cell Expansion
Cell divisions do not constitute growth because there is no 
increase of mass involved. Rather, it is cell expansion that 
is responsible for plant growth. Before discussing how cell 
expansion contributes to plant growth and form, it is useful 
to consider the difference in cell expansion between plants 
and animals. Animal cells grow mainly by synthesizing 
protein-rich cytoplasm, a metabolically expensive process. 
Growing plant cells also produce additional protein-rich 
material in their cytoplasm, but water uptake typically 
accounts for about 90% of expansion. Most of this water is 
stored in the large central vacuole. The vacuolar solution, 
or vacuolar sap, is very dilute and nearly devoid of the ener-
getically expensive macromolecules that are found in great 
abundance in the rest of the cytoplasm. Large vacuoles are 
therefore a “cheap” way of filling space, enabling a plant to 
grow rapidly and economically. Bamboo shoots, for instance, 
can elongate more than 2 m per week. Rapid and efficient 
extensibility of shoots and roots was an important evolution-
ary adaptation that increased their exposure to light and soil.
Plant cells rarely expand equally in all directions. Their 
greatest expansion is usually oriented along the plant’s main 
. Figure 35.27 Asymmetrical cell division and stomatal 
development. An asymmetrical cell division precedes the 
development of epidermal guard cells, the cells that border stomata 
(see Figure 35.18).
Asymmetrical
cell division
Guard cell
”mother cell”
Developing
guard cells
Undifferentiated
epidermal cell
. Figure 35.28 The orientation of plant cell expansion. 
Growing plant cells expand mainly through water uptake. In a 
growing cell, enzymes weaken cross-links in the cell wall, allowing 
it to expand as water diffuses into the vacuole by osmosis; at the 
same time, more microfibrils are made. The orientation of the cell 
expansion is mainly perpendicular to the orientation of cellulose 
microfibrils in the wall. The orientation of microtubules in the 
cell’s outermost cytoplasm determines the orientation of cellulose 
microfibrils (fluorescent LM). The microfibrils are embedded in a 
matrix of other (noncellulose) polysaccharides, some of which form 
the cross-links visible in the TEM.
Cellulose
microfibrils
Microfibrils
Cross-links
Expansion
VacuolesNucleus
5 om
Morphogenesis and Pattern Formation
A plant’s body is more than a collection of dividing and expand-
ing cells. During morphogenesis, cells acquire different identi-
ties in an ordered spatial arrangement. For example, dermal 
tissue forms on the exterior and vascular tissue in the  interior—
never the other way around. The development of specific 
 s t r u c t u r e s  i n  s p e c i f i c  l o c a t i o n s  i s  c a l l e d  pattern formation.
Two types of hypotheses have been put forward to explain 
how the fate of plant cells is determined during pattern 
formation. Hypotheses based on lineage-based mechanisms 
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   831 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 833 ===

832 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
propose that cell fate is determined early in development and 
that cells pass on this destiny to their progeny. In this view, 
the basic pattern of cell differentiation is mapped out accord-
ing to the directions in which meristematic cells divide and 
expand. On the other hand, hypotheses based on position-
based mechanisms propose that the cell’s final position in an 
emerging organ determines what kind of cell it will become. 
In support of this view, experiments in which neighboring 
cells have been destroyed with lasers have demonstrated that 
a plant cell’s fate is established late in the cell’s development 
and largely depends on signaling from its neighbors.
In contrast, cell fate in animals is largely determined by 
lineage-dependent mechanisms involving transcription fac-
tors. The homeotic (Hox) genes that encode such transcription 
factors are critical for the proper number and placement of 
embryonic structures, such as legs and antennae, in the fruit fly 
Drosophila (see Figure 18.19). Interestingly, maize has a homo-
log of Hox genes called KNOTTED-1, but unlike its counterparts 
in the animal world, KNOTTED-1 does not affect the number or 
placement of plant organs. As you will see, an unrelated class of 
transcription factors called MADS-box proteins plays that role in 
plants. KNOTTED-1 is, however, important in the development 
of leaf shape, including the production of compound leaves. If 
the KNOTTED-1 gene is expressed in greater quantity than nor-
mal in the genome of tomato plants, the normally compound 
leaves will then become “super-compound” (Figure 35.29).
. Figure 35.29 Overexpression of a Hox-like gene in leaf 
formation. KNOTTED-1 is a gene that is involved in leaf and leaflet 
formation. An increase in its expression in tomato plants results in 
leaves that are “super-compound” (right) compared with normal 
leaves (left).
. Figure 35.30 Control of root hair differentiation by a 
homeotic gene. (LM)
Cortical
cells
20 om
Here an 
epidermal cell 
borders two 
cortical cells. 
GLABRA-2 is 
not expressed, 
and the cell 
will develop 
a root hair.     
The root cap cells external to the epidermal layer 
will be sloughed off before root hairs emerge.
When an epidermal cell borders a single cortical 
cell, the homeotic gene GLABRA-2 is expressed, 
and the cell remains hairless. (The blue color 
indicates cells in which GLABRA-2 is expressed.)
WHAT IF? What would the roots look like if GLABRA-2 were rendered 
dysfunctional by a mutation?
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Philip  Benfey:  
Studying root development
transcription and translation, resulting in the production of 
specific proteins.
Evidence suggests that the activation or inactivation of 
specific genes involved in cell differentiation results largely 
from cell-to-cell communication. Cells receive information 
about how they should specialize from neighboring cells. 
For example, two cell types arise in the root epidermis of 
Arabidopsis: root hair cells and hairless epidermal cells. Cell 
fate is associated with the position of the epidermal cells rela-
tive to other plant cells. The immature epidermal cells that 
are in contact with two underlying cells of the root cortex dif-
ferentiate into root hair cells, whereas the immature epider-
mal cells in contact with only one cell in the cortex differenti-
ate into mature hairless cells. The differential expression of a 
homeotic gene called GLABRA-2 (from the Latin glaber, bald) 
is needed for proper distribution of root hairs (Figure 35.30). 
Researchers have demonstrated this requirement by coupling 
the GLABRA-2 gene to a “reporter gene” that causes every cell 
expressing GLABRA-2 in the root to turn pale blue following 
a certain protocol. The GLABRA-2 gene is normally expressed 
only in epidermal cells that will not develop root hairs.
Shifts in Development: Phase Changes
Multicellular organisms generally pass through developmental 
stages. In humans, these are infancy, childhood, adolescence, 
and adulthood, with puberty as the dividing line between 
the nonreproductive and reproductive stages. Plants also pass 
through stages, developing from a juvenile stage to an adult 
Gene Expression and the Control  
of Cell Differentiation
The cells of a developing organism can synthesize different 
proteins and diverge in structure and function even though 
they share a common genome. If a mature cell removed 
from a root or leaf can dedifferentiate in tissue culture and 
give rise to the diverse cell types of a plant, then it must 
possess all the genes necessary to make any kind of cell in 
the plant. Therefore, cell differentiation depends, to a large 
degree, on the control of gene expression—the regulation of 
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   832 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 834 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 833
the roles of these signals in flowering in Concept 39.3.) Unlike 
vegetative growth, which is indeterminate, floral growth is usu-
ally determinate: The production of a flower by a shoot apical 
meristem generally stops the primary growth of that shoot. The 
transition from vegetative growth to flowering is associated 
with the switching on of flower-inducing genes. The protein 
products of these genes are transcription factors that regulate 
the genes required for the conversion of the indeterminate veg-
etative meristems to determinate floral meristems.
When a shoot apical meristem is induced to flower, the 
order of each primordium’s emergence determines its devel-
opment into a specific type of floral organ—a sepal, petal, 
stamen, or carpel (see Figure 30.8 to review basic flower 
structure). These floral organs form four whorls that can be 
described roughly as concentric “circles” when viewed from 
above. Sepals form the first (outermost) whorl; petals form the 
second; stamens form the third; and carpels form the fourth 
(innermost) whorl. Plant biologists have identified several 
genes that encode transcription factors that regulate the 
development of this characteristic floral pattern. Positional 
information determines which genes are expressed in a par-
ticular floral organ primordium. The result is the development 
of an emerging floral primordium into a specific floral organ. 
A mutation in a flower-inducing gene can cause abnormal 
floral development, such as petals growing in place of stamens 
(Figure 35.32). Some homeotic mutants with increased petal 
numbers produce showier flowers that are prized by gardeners.
vegetative stage to an adult reproductive stage. In animals, 
the developmental changes take place throughout the entire 
organism, such as when a larva develops into an adult animal. 
In contrast, plant developmental stages, called phases, occur 
within a single region, the shoot apical meristem. The mor-
phological changes that arise from these transitions in shoot 
apical meristem activity are called phase changes. In the 
transition from a juvenile phase to an adult phase, some spe-
cies exhibit conspicuous changes in leaf shape (Figure 35.31). 
Juvenile nodes and internodes retain their juvenile status even 
after the shoot apical meristem of the main shoot has changed 
to the adult phase. Therefore, any new leaves that develop on 
branches that emerge from axillary buds at juvenile nodes will 
also be juvenile, even though the apical meristem of the stem’s 
main axis may have been producing mature nodes for years.
If environmental conditions permit, an adult plant is 
induced to flower. Biologists have made great progress in 
explaining the genetic control of floral development—the 
topic of the next section.
Genetic Control of Flowering
Flower formation involves a phase change from vegetative 
growth to reproductive growth. This transition is triggered by 
a combination of environmental cues, such as day length, and 
internal signals, such as hormones. (You will learn more about 
. Figure 35.31 Phase change in Muehlenbeckia australis. This 
native climbing vine of New Zealand has two types of leaves: fiddle-
shaped juvenile leaves (top) and oval, smooth-margined mature 
leaves. This dual foliage reflects a phase change in the development 
of the apical meristem of each shoot. Once a node forms, the 
developmental phase—juvenile or adult—is fixed; fiddle-shaped 
leaves do not mature into oval-shaped leaves.
Juvenile leaf
Mature leaf
. Figure 35.32 Genes and pattern formation in flower 
development.
Pe
Pe
Pe
Pe
Se
Se
Ca
St
Se
mNormal Arabidopsis flower. 
Arabidopsis normally has four whorls of 
flower parts: sepals (Se), petals (Pe), 
stamens (St), and carpels (Ca).
c Abnormal Arabidopsis flower. 
Researchers have identified several 
mutations that cause abnormal flowers 
to develop. This flower has an extra set 
of petals in place of stamens and an 
internal flower where normal plants 
have carpels.
MAKE CONNECTIONS Provide another 
example of a homeotic gene mutation 
that leads to organs being produced in the 
wrong place (see Concept 18.4).
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   833 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 835 ===

834 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
By studying mutants with abnormal flowers, research-
ers have identified and cloned three classes of genes that 
determine floral organ identity. Figure 35.33a shows a 
simplified version of the ABC hypothesis of flower for-
mation, which proposes that three classes of genes direct 
the formation of the four types of floral organs. According 
to the ABC hypothesis, each class of genes is switched on 
in two specific whorls of the floral meristem. Normally, A 
genes are switched on in the two outer whorls (sepals and 
petals); B genes are switched on in the two middle whorls 
(petals and stamens); and C genes are switched on in the 
two inner whorls (stamens and carpels). Sepals arise from 
those parts of floral meristems in which only A genes are 
active; petals arise where A and B genes are active; stamens 
where B and C genes are active; and carpels where only C 
genes are active. The ABC hypothesis can account for the 
phenotypes of mutants lacking A, B, or C gene activity, with 
one addition: Where A gene activity is present, it inhibits C, 
and vice versa. If either the A gene or C gene is suppressed, 
the other gene is expressed. Figure 35.33b shows the flo-
ral patterns of mutants lacking each of the three classes 
of genes and depicts how the hypothesis accounts for the 
. Figure 35.33 The ABC hypothesis for the functioning of genes in flower development.
CarpelsA
B
C
Stamens
Petals
Sepals
Carpel
Petal
Stamen
Sepal
Carpels develop
where only C genes
are expressed.
Stamens develop
where both B and C
genes are expressed.
Petals develop
where both A and B
genes are expressed.
(b)Side view of wild-type flower and flowers with organ identity mutations.  The phenotype of mutants lacking a 
functional A, B, or C gene can be explained by the model in part (a) and the observation that if the A gene or C gene 
is suppressed, then the other gene is expressed in that whorl. For example, if the A gene is suppressed in a mutant, then 
the C gene is expressed where the A gene would normally be expressed. Therefore, carpels (C gene expressed) develop 
in the outermost whorl, and stamens (B and C genes expressed) develop in the next whorl.
(a) A schematic diagram of the ABC hypothesis. Three classes of genes are 
responsible for the spatial pattern of floral parts. These genes, designated 
A, B, and C, regulate expression of 
other genes responsible for 
development of sepals, petals, 
stamens, and carpels.
Mutant with A gene suppressed
(only carpels and stamens)
Mutant with B gene suppressed
(only sepals and carpels)
Mutant with C gene suppressed
(only sepals and petals)
Wild type
Stamen
Petal
Sepal
Carpel
Sepals develop
where only A genes
are expressed.
DRAW IT (a) For each mutant, draw a “bull’s-eye” diagram like the one in part (a), labeling the type of organ and 
gene(s) expressed in each whorl. (b) Draw and label a “bull’s-eye” diagram for a mutant flower in which the A and B 
genes were suppressed.
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Virginia  Walbot:  
Researching plant genetics and  development
CONCEPT CHECK 35.5
1. How does asymmetrical cell division affect the fate of a cell 
as it matures?
2. What are three differences between animal development 
and plant development?
3. WHAT IF? In some species, sepals look like petals, and both 
are collectively called “tepals.” Suggest an extension to the 
ABC hypothesis that could account for tepals.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
floral phenotypes. By constructing such hypotheses and 
designing experiments to test them, researchers are tracing 
the genetic basis of plant development.
In dissecting the plant to examine its parts, as we have 
done in this chapter, we must remember that the whole plant 
functions as an integrated organism. Plant structures largely 
reflect evolutionary adaptations to the challenges of a photo-
autotrophic existence on land.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   834 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 836 ===

 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 835
35 Chapter Review  Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
 Primary growth lengthens roots and shoots  
(pp. 822–825)
• The root apical meristem is located near the tip of the root, 
where it generates cells for the growing root axis and the root cap.
• The apical meristem of a shoot is located in the apical bud, where 
it gives rise to alternating internodes and leaf-bearing nodes.
• Eudicot stems have vascular bundles in a ring, whereas monocot 
stems have scattered vascular bundles.
• Mesophyll cells are adapted for photosynthesis. Stomata, epi-
dermal pores formed by pairs of guard cells, allow for gaseous 
exchange and are major avenues for water loss.
Stoma
Lower
epidermis
Upper
epidermis
Spongy
mesophyll
Palisade
mesophyll
Xylem
Phloem Guard cells
Vein
Dermal
Ground
Vascular
Key
to labels
? How does branching in roots differ from that in stems?
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
CONCEPT 35.1
Plants have a hierarchical organization consisting  
of organs, tissues, and cells (pp. 813–819)
• Va s c u l a r  p l a n t s  h ave  s h o o t s  c o n s i st i n g  o f  stems, leaves, and, 
in angiosperms, flowers. Roots anchor the plant, absorb and 
conduct water and minerals, and store food. Leaves are attached 
to stem nodes and are the main organs of photosynthesis. 
The axillary buds, in axils of leaves and stems, give rise to 
branches. Plant organs may be adapted for specialized functions.
• V ascular plants have three tissue systems—dermal, vascular, 
and ground—which are continuous throughout the plant. The 
dermal tissue is a continuous layer of cells that covers the plant 
exterior. V ascular tissues (xylem and phloem) facilitate the 
long-distance transport of substances. Ground tissues function 
in storage, metabolism, and regeneration.
• Parenchyma cells are relatively undifferentiated and thin-walled 
cells that retain the ability to divide; they perform most of the meta-
bolic functions of synthesis and storage. Collenchyma cells have 
unevenly thickened walls; they support young, growing parts of 
the plant. Sclerenchyma cells—sclereids and fibers—have thick, 
lignified walls that help support mature, nongrowing parts of the 
plant. Tracheid s and vessel elements, the water- conducting 
cells of xylem, have thick walls and are dead at functional maturity. 
Sieve-tube elements are living but highly modified cells that are 
largely devoid of internal organelles; they function in the transport 
of sugars through the phloem of angiosperms.
? Describe at least three specializations in plant organs and plant cells 
that are adaptations to life on land.
CONCEPT 35.2
Different meristems generate new cells for primary 
and secondary growth (pp. 820–821)
Axillary bud meristem
Root apical 
meristems
Vascular
cambium
Cork 
cambium
Shoot tip 
(shoot apical
meristem and
young leaves)
Lateral meristems
? What is the difference between primary and secondary growth?
CONCEPT 35.3
CONCEPT 35.4
Secondary growth increases the diameter of stems  
and roots in woody plants (pp. 826–829)
• The vascular cambium is a meristematic cylinder that 
 p r o d u c e s  s e c o n d a r y  x y l e m  a n d  s e c o n d a r y  p h l o e m  d u r-
ing  secondary growth. Older layers of secondary xylem 
 (heartwood) become inactive, whereas younger layers 
 ( s a p w o o d )  s t i l l  c o n d u c t  w a t e r .
Heartwood
Sapwood
Vascular cambium
Secondary phloem
Layers of periderm
Bark
Vascular
ray
Growth 
ring
Secondary xylem
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   835 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 837 ===

836 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
11. DRAW IT On this cross section from a woody eudicot, label a 
growth ring, late wood, early wood, and a vessel element. Then 
draw an arrow in the pith-to-cork direction.
12. VISUAL SKILLS How does the internal anatomy of a tea leaf 
differ from that of an iris leaf? (Review Figure 35.18.) How 
might this difference relate to the orientations of the leaves? 
Explain how the difference shows that structure fits function.
Tea leaves
Surface
exposed
to sun
Shaded
surface
Both surfaces equally
exposed to sun
Iris leaves
Cross section of tea leaf
Cross section of iris leaf
• The cork cambium gives rise to a thick protective covering 
called the periderm, which consists of the cork cambium plus the 
layers of cork cells it produces.
Secondary xylem (two
years of production)
Vascular cambium
Most recent
cork cambium Cork Bark
Layers of
periderm
Secondary phloem
Growth
? What advantages did plants gain from the evolution of  
secondary growth?
CONCEPT 35.5
Growth, morphogenesis, and cell differentiation 
produce the plant body (pp. 829–834)
• Cell division and cell expansion are the primary determinants of 
growth.
• Morphogenesis, the development of body shape and organiza-
tion, depends on cells responding to positional information from 
their neighbors.
• Cell differentiation, arising from differential gene activation, en-
ables cells within the plant to assume different functions despite 
having identical genomes. The way in which a plant cell differen-
tiates is determined largely by the cell’s position in the develop-
ing plant.
• Internal or environmental cues may cause a plant to switch from 
one developmental stage to another—for example, from develop-
ing juvenile leaves to developing mature leaves. Such changes in 
shape are called phase changes.
• Studies of floral development have provided a model system for 
studying pattern formation. The ABC hypothesis identifies 
how three classes of genes control formation of sepals, petals, 
stamens, and carpels.
? By what mechanism do plant cells tend to elongate along one axis 
instead of expanding in all directions?
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–10 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   836 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 838 ===

18. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
This stained light micrograph shows a cross section through a plant 
organ from Hakea purpurea, a shrub native to some arid regions 
of Australia. (a) Review Figures 35.14, 35.1 7 , and 35.18 to identify 
whether this is a root, stem, or leaf. Explain your reasoning. (b) How  
might this organ be an adaptation for dry conditions?
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
13. VISUAL SKILLS Visitors to the state of Washington can 
marvel at an unusual sight: a bicycle embedded 4 m above 
the ground in a living tree. Use your knowledge of primary 
and secondary growth to visualize and explain how this 
happened.
14. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Evolutionary biologists have 
coined the term exaptation to describe a common occurrence 
in the evolution of life: A limb or organ evolves in a particular 
context but over time takes on a new function (see Concept 
25.6). What are some examples of exaptations in plant organs?
15. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Grasslands typically do not flourish 
when large herbivores are removed. Instead, grasslands are 
replaced by broad-leaved herbaceous eudicots, shrubs, and 
trees. Based on your knowledge of the structure and growth 
habits of monocots versus eudicots, suggest a reason why.
16. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY Hunger and 
malnutrition are urgent problems for many poor countries, 
yet plant biologists in wealthy nations have focused most of 
their research efforts on Arabidopsis thaliana. Some people 
have argued that if plant biologists are truly concerned about 
fighting world hunger, they should study cassava and plantain 
because these two crops are staples for many of the world’s 
poor. If you were an Arabidopsis researcher, how might you 
respond to this argument?
17. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION In a short essay 
(100–150 words), explain how the evolution of lignin affected 
vascular plant structure and function.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How does one gene affect leaf shape? 
Go to “Shape Shifters of the Plant World”  
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
 CHAPTER 35  Plant Structure and Growth 837
URRY1637_12_GE_C35_PRF.indd   837 3/14/20   3:59 AM

=== SIDE 839 ===

Figure 36.1 This English ivy has covered every square centimeter of a wall with 
foliage, an effective way to acquire light energy for photosynthesis. The sugars 
produced by the leaves and the water and minerals absorbed by the roots have to 
be transported throughout the plant.
Transport in Vascular Plants36
Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 36
• Figure 36.9 Walkthrough: Transport of Water 
and Minerals from Root Hairs to the Xylem
• BioFlix® Animation: Water Transport in 
Plants
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Water Transport in 
Plants: The Transpiration-Cohesion-
Tension Mechanism
• BioFlix® Tutorial: Transpiration
Ready-to-Go Teaching Module 
(in Instructor Resources)
• Transport in Plants (Concept 36.2)
Study Tip
Make a flowchart: Make a simple 
flowchart of the movement of water 
molecules from the soil through the 
tissues of a plant to the outside air.
Water in soil
Root hairs
is absorbed by
36.1 Adaptations for acquiring resources 
were key steps in the evolution of 
vascular plants p. 839
36.2 Different mechanisms transport 
substances over short or long 
distances p. 841
36.3 Transpiration drives the transport 
of water and minerals from roots to 
shoots via the xylem p. 846
36.4 The rate of transpiration is 
regulated by stomata p. 850
36.5 Sugars are transported from sources 
to sinks via the phloem p. 853
36.6 The symplast is highly dynamic  
p. 855
KEY CONCEPTS
Water and minerals are pulled up 
from the roots by negative pressure 
(tension) generated by evaporation from 
the leaves.
Sugars are pushed by positive pressure 
from where they are produced or stored to 
where they are needed. They can move both 
ways between leaves and roots.
Transport 
of sugars 
from mature 
leaves to 
roots
Water molecules 
are joined in 
chains as they 
move upward.
Transport 
of sugars 
from a 
storage 
root to 
new 
leaves
What causes the movement of water, minerals,
and sugars in most vascular plants?
838
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   838 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 840 ===

As plants evolved and increased in number, competition 
for light, water, and nutrients intensified. Taller plants with 
broad, flat appendages had an advantage in absorbing light. 
This increase in surface area, however, resulted in more evapo-
ration and therefore a greater need for water. Larger shoots also 
required stronger anchorage. These needs favored the produc-
tion of multicellular, branching roots. Meanwhile, as greater 
shoot heights further separated the top of the photosynthetic 
shoot from the nonphotosynthetic parts below ground, natu-
ral selection favored plants capable of efficient long-distance 
transport of water, minerals, and products of photosynthesis.
The evolution of vascular tissue consisting of xylem and 
phloem made possible the development of extensive root 
and shoot systems that carry out long-distance transport 
(see Figure 35.10). The xylem transports water and minerals 
from roots to shoots. The phloem transports products of pho-
tosynthesis from where they are made or stored to where they 
are needed. Figure 36.2 provides an overview of resource acqui-
sition and transport in an actively photosynthesizing plant.
Shoot Architecture and Light Capture
Because most plants are photoautotrophs, their success 
depends ultimately on their ability to photosynthesize. Over 
the course of evolution, plants have developed a wide variety 
Adaptations for acquiring resources 
were key steps in the evolution of 
vascular plants
EVOLUTIONMost plants grow in soil and therefore inhabit 
two worlds—above ground, where shoots acquire sunlight 
and CO2, and below ground, where roots acquire water and 
minerals. The successful colonization of the land by plants 
depended on adaptations that allowed early plants to acquire 
resources from these two different settings.
The algal ancestors of plants absorbed water, miner-
als, and CO2 directly from the water in which they lived. 
Transport in these algae was relatively simple because every 
cell was close to the source of these substances. The earli-
est plants were nonvascular and produced photosynthetic 
shoots above the shallow fresh water in which they lived. 
These leafless shoots typically had waxy cuticles and few 
stomata, which allowed them to avoid excessive water loss 
while still permitting some exchange of CO2 and O2 for pho-
tosynthesis. The anchoring and absorbing functions of early 
plants were assumed by the base of the stem or by threadlike 
rhizoids (see Figure 29.16).
CONCEPT 36.1
Light
H2O
CO2
O2
CO2
O2
H2O and
minerals
Sugar
Sugars are produced by 
photosynthesis in the leaves.
Transpiration, the loss
of water from leaves
(mostly through stomata),
creates a force within leaves
that pulls xylem sap upward.
Water and minerals are
transported upward from
roots to shoots as xylem sap.
Phloem sap can flow both ways 
between shoots and roots. It 
moves from sites of sugar 
production (usually leaves) or 
storage (usually roots) to sites of 
sugar use or storage.
Water and minerals in 
the soil are absorbed 
by roots.
As root cells carry out their cellular respiration, 
they exchange gases with the air spaces of the 
soil, taking in O2 and discharging CO2.
In leaves and green stems, gas exchange occurs 
through stomata. During photosynthesis, CO2 is 
taken up and O2 is produced. Cells use some of
that O2 for cellular respiration, and the rest is 
released into the air.
. Figure 36.2 An overview of resource acquisition and transport  
in a vascular plant during the day.
MAKE CONNECTIONS How would you change the figure in order to show  
gas exchanges at night? (See Figure 11.22.)
 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 839
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   839 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 841 ===

840 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
of shoot architectures that enable each species to compete 
successfully for light absorption in the ecological niche it 
occupies. For example, the lengths and widths of stems, as 
well as the branching pattern of shoots, are all architectural 
features affecting light capture.
Stems serve as supporting structures for leaves and as 
conduits for the transport of water and nutrients. Plants that 
grow tall avoid shading from neighboring plants. Most tall 
plants require thick stems, which enable greater vascular 
flow to and from the leaves and stronger mechanical support 
for them. Vines are an exception, relying on other objects 
(usually other plants) to support their stems. In woody 
plants, stems become thicker through secondary growth (see 
Figure 35.11). Branching generally enables plants to harvest 
sunlight for photosynthesis more effectively. However, some 
species, such as the coconut palm, do not branch at all. Why 
is there so much variation in branching patterns? Plants have 
only a finite amount of energy to devote to shoot growth. If 
most of that energy goes into branching, there is less available 
for growing tall, and the risk of being shaded by taller plants 
increases. Conversely, if most of the energy goes into growing 
tall, the plants are not optimally harvesting sunlight.
Leaf size and structure account for much of the outward 
diversity in plant form. Leaves range in length from 1.3 mm 
in the pygmyweed (Crassula connata), a native of dry, sandy 
regions in the western United States, to 20 m in the palm 
Raphia regalis, a native of African rain forests. These species 
represent extreme examples of a general correlation observed 
between water availability and leaf size. The largest leaves are 
typically found in species from tropical rain forests, whereas 
the smallest are usually found in species from dry or very cold 
environments, where liquid water is scarce and evaporative 
loss is more problematic.
The arrangement of leaves on a stem, known as phyllotaxy, 
is an architectural feature important in light capture. 
Phyllotaxy is determined by the shoot apical meristem (see 
Figure 35.16) and is specific to each species (Figure 36.3). 
A species may have one leaf per node (alternate, or spiral, 
phyllotaxy), two leaves per node (opposite phyllotaxy), or 
more (whorled phyllotaxy). Most angiosperms have alter-
nate phyllotaxy, with leaves arranged in an ascending spiral 
around the stem, each successive leaf emerging about 137.5° 
from the site of the previous one. Why 137.5°? One hypoth-
esis is that this angle minimizes shading of the lower leaves 
by those above. In environments where intense sunlight 
can harm leaves, the greater shading provided by oppositely 
arranged leaves may be advantageous.
The total area of the leafy portions of all the plants in a 
community, from the top layer of vegetation to the bottom 
layer, affects the productivity of each plant. When there are 
many layers of vegetation, the shading of the lower leaves 
is so great that they photosynthesize less than they respire. 
When this happens, the nonproductive leaves or branches 
undergo programmed cell death and are eventually shed, a 
process called self-pruning.
Plant features that reduce self-shading increase light 
capture. A useful measurement in this regard is the leaf area 
index, the ratio of the total upper leaf surface of a single plant 
or an entire crop divided by the surface area of the land on 
which the plant or crop grows (Figure 36.4). Leaf area index 
values of up to 7 are common for many mature crops, and 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13 14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
31
32
34
4042
1 mm
Shoot
apical
meristem
Buds
. Figure 36.3 Emerging phyllotaxy of Norway spruce. This 
SEM, taken from above a shoot tip, shows the pattern of emergence 
of leaves. The leaves are numbered, with 1 being the youngest. 
(Some numbered leaves are not visible in the close-up.)
VISUAL SKILLS With your finger, trace the progression of leaf 
emergence, moving from leaf number 29 to 28 and so on. What is the 
pattern? Based on this pattern of phyllotaxy, predict between which two 
developing leaf primordia the next primordium will emerge.
Plant A
Leaf area 5 40%
of ground area
(leaf area index 5 0.4)
Plant B
Leaf area 5 80%
of ground area
(leaf area index 5 0.8)
Ground area
covered by plant
. Figure 36.4 Leaf area index. The leaf area index of a single 
plant is the ratio of the total area of the top surfaces of the leaves to 
the area of ground covered by the plant, as shown in this illustration 
of two plants viewed from the top. With many layers of leaves, a 
leaf area index value can easily exceed 1.
?  Would a higher leaf area index always increase the amount of 
photosynthesis? Explain.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   840 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 842 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 841
Plant roots also form mutually beneficial relationships 
with microorganisms that enable the plant to exploit soil 
resources more efficiently. For example, the evolution of 
mutualistic associations between roots and fungi called 
mycorrhizae was a critical step in the successful coloniza-
tion of land by plants. Mycorrhizal hyphae indirectly endow 
the root systems of many plants with an enormous surface 
area for absorbing water and minerals, particularly phos-
phate. The role of mycorrhizae in plant nutrition will be 
examined in Concept 37.3.
Once acquired, resources must be transported to other 
parts of the plant that need them. In the next section, we 
examine the processes and pathways that enable resources 
such as water, minerals, and sugars to be transported 
throughout the plant.
there is little agricultural benefit to leaf area indexes higher 
than this value. Adding more leaves increases shading of 
lower leaves to the point that self-pruning occurs.
Another factor affecting light capture is leaf orientation. 
Some plants have horizontally oriented leaves; others, such 
as grasses, have leaves that are vertically oriented. In low-light 
conditions, horizontal leaves capture sunlight much more 
effectively than vertical leaves. In grasslands or other sunny 
regions, however, horizontal orientation may expose upper 
leaves to overly intense light, injuring leaves and reducing 
photosynthesis. But if a plant’s leaves are nearly vertical, 
light rays are essentially parallel to the leaf surfaces, so no leaf 
receives too much light, and light penetrates more deeply to 
the lower leaves.
The Photosynthesis–Water Loss Compromise
The broad surface of most leaves favors light capture, while 
open stomatal pores allow for the diffusion of CO2 into the 
photosynthetic tissues. Open stomatal pores, however, also 
promote evaporation of water from the plant. Over 90% 
of the water lost by plants is by evaporation from stomatal 
pores. Consequently, shoot adaptations represent compro-
mises between enhancing photosynthesis and minimizing 
water loss, particularly in environments where water is scarce. 
Later in the chapter, we’ll discuss the mechanisms by which 
plants enhance CO2 uptake and minimize water loss by regu-
lating the opening of stomatal pores.
Root Architecture and Acquisition  
of Water and Minerals
Just as carbon dioxide and sunlight are resources exploited by 
the shoot system, soil contains resources mined by the root 
system. Plants rapidly adjust the architecture and physiol-
ogy of their roots to exploit patches of available nutrients 
in the soil. The roots of many plants, for example, respond 
to pockets of low nitrate availability in soils by extending 
straight through the pockets instead of branching within 
them. Conversely, when encountering a pocket rich in 
nitrate, a root will often branch extensively there. Root cells 
also respond to high soil nitrate levels by synthesizing more 
proteins involved in nitrate transport and assimilation.  
Thus, not only does the plant devote more of its mass to 
exploiting a nitrate-rich patch, but the cells also absorb 
nitrate more efficiently.
The efficient absorption of limited nutrients is also 
enhanced by reduced competition within the root system. 
For example, cuttings taken from stolons of buffalo grass 
(Bouteloua dactyloides) develop fewer and shorter roots in 
the presence of cuttings from the same plant than they do 
in the presence of cuttings from another buffalo grass plant. 
Researchers are trying to uncover how the plant distinguishes 
self from nonself.
CONCEPT CHECK 36.1
1. Why is long-distance transport important for vascular 
plants?
2. Some plants can detect increased levels of light reflected 
from leaves of encroaching neighbors. This detection  
elicits stem elongation, production of erect leaves, and 
reduced lateral branching. How do these responses help 
the plant compete?
3. WHAT IF? A defoliating insect targets new leaves. How will 
this affect the leaf area of a deciduous conifer compared to 
that of an evergreen conifer?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 36.2
Different mechanisms transport 
substances over short or long 
distances
Given the diversity of substances that move through plants 
and the great range of distances and barriers over which 
such substances must be transported, it is not surprising that 
plants employ a variety of transport processes. Before exam-
ining these processes, however, we’ll look at the two major 
pathways of transport: the apoplast and the symplast.
The Apoplast and Symplast:  
Transport Continuums
Plant tissues have two major compartments—the apoplast 
and the symplast. The apoplast consists of everything 
external to the plasma membranes of living cells and includes 
cell walls, extracellular spaces, and the interior of dead cells 
such as vessel elements and tracheids (see Figure 35.10). 
The symplast consists of the entire mass of cytosol of all 
the living cells in a plant, as well as the plasmodesmata, the 
cytoplasmic channels that interconnect them.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   841 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 843 ===

842 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
cotransported in plants, whereas Na+ 
is typically cotransported in animals. 
During cotransport, plant cells use the 
energy in the H+ gradient and mem-
brane potential to drive the active 
transport of many different solutes. 
For instance, cotransport with H+ is 
responsible for absorption of neutral 
solutes, such as the sugar sucrose, by 
phloem cells and other plant cells. 
An H+>sucrose cotransporter couples 
movement of sucrose against its con-
centration gradient with movement of 
H+ down its electrochemical gradient 
(Figure 36.6b). Cotransport with H+ 
also facilitates movement of ions, as in the uptake of nitrate 
1NO3
-2 by root cells (Figure 36.6c).
The membranes of plant cells also have ion channels that 
allow only certain ions to pass (Figure 36.6d). As in animal 
cells, most channels are gated, opening or closing in response 
to stimuli such as chemicals, pressure, or voltage. Later in this 
chapter, we’ll discuss how potassium ion channels in guard 
cells function in opening and closing stomata. Ion channels 
are also involved in producing electrical signals analogous 
to the action potentials of animals (see Concept 48.2). 
However, these signals are 1,000 times slower and employ 
Ca2+-activated anion channels rather than the sodium ion 
channels used by animal cells.
Short-Distance Transport of Water  
Across Plasma Membranes
The absorption or loss of water by a cell occurs by osmosis, 
the diffusion of free water—water that is not bound to solutes 
or surfaces—across a membrane (see Figure 8.12). The physi-
cal property that predicts the direction in which water will 
flow is called water potential, a quantity that includes 
the effects of solute concentration and physical pressure. 
Free water moves from regions of higher water potential to 
regions of lower water potential if there is no barrier to its 
flow. The word potential in the term water potential refers to 
water’s potential energy—water’s capacity to perform work 
when it moves from a region of higher water potential to a 
region of lower water potential. For example, if a plant cell 
or seed is immersed in a solution that has a higher water 
potential, water will move into the cell or seed, causing it 
to expand. The expansion of plant cells and seeds can be a 
powerful force: The expansion of cells in tree roots can break 
concrete sidewalks, and the swelling of wet grain seeds within 
the holds of damaged ships can produce catastrophic hull 
failure and sink the ships. Given the strong forces gener-
ated by swelling seeds, it is interesting to consider whether 
water uptake by seeds is an active process. This question is 
The compartmental structure of plants provides three 
routes for transport within a plant tissue or organ: the apo-
plastic, symplastic, and transmembrane routes (Figure 36.5). 
In the apoplastic route, water and solutes (dissolved chemicals) 
move along the continuum of cell walls and extracellular 
spaces. In the symplastic route, water and solutes move along 
the continuum of cytosol. This route requires substances to 
cross a plasma membrane once, when they first enter the 
plant. After entering one cell, substances can move from cell 
to cell via plasmodesmata. In the transmembrane route, water 
and solutes move out of one cell, across the cell wall, and into 
the neighboring cell, which may pass them to the next cell 
in the same way. The transmembrane route requires repeated 
crossings of plasma membranes as substances exit one cell 
and enter the next. These three routes are not mutually  
exclusive, and some substances may use more than one 
route to varying degrees.
Short-Distance Transport of Solutes  
Across Plasma Membranes
In plants, as in any organism, the selective permeability of the 
plasma membrane controls the short-distance movement of 
substances into and out of cells (see Concept 8.2). Both active 
and passive transport mechanisms occur in plants, and plant 
cell membranes are equipped with the same general types of 
pumps and transport proteins (channel proteins, carrier pro-
teins, and cotransporters) that function in other cells. There 
are, however, specific differences between the membrane 
transport processes of plant and animal cells. In this section, 
we’ll focus on some of those differences.
Unlike in animal cells, hydrogen ions 1H+2 rather than 
sodium ions 1Na+2 play the primary role in basic transport 
processes in plant cells. For example, in plant cells the 
membrane potential (the voltage across the membrane) 
is established mainly through the pumping of H+ by pro-
ton pumps (Figure 36.6a) rather than the pumping of 
Na+ by sodium-potassium pumps. Also, H+ is most often 
The apoplast is
the continuum
of cell walls and
extracellular
spaces.
Apoplast
Symplast
Key
Plasma membrane
Cytosol
Plasmodesma
Symplastic route
The symplast is the
continuum of
cytosol connected
by plasmodesmata.
Transmembrane route
Apoplastic route
Cell wall
. Figure 36.5 Cell compartments and routes for short-distance transport. 
Some substances may use more than one transport route.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   842 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 844 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 843
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
+–
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
+–
S
S
SS S
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+H+
S
H+
H+
Ion channel
Potassium ion
Nitrate
Sucrose
(neutral solute)
NO3
– 
NO3
– 
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
CYTOPLASM EXTRACELLULAR FLUID
ATP H+
H+
H+
H+
H+H+
H+
H+
(a) H+ and membrane potential. 
The plasma membranes of plant 
cells use ATP-dependent proton 
pumps to pump H+ out of the cell. 
These pumps contribute to the 
membrane potential and the 
establishment of a pH gradient 
across the membrane. These two 
forms of potential energy can drive 
the transport of solutes.
(b) H+ and cotransport of neutral 
solutes. Neutral solutes such as 
sugars can be loaded into plant cells 
by cotransport with H+ ions. 
H+/sucrose cotransporters, for 
example, play a key role in loading 
sugar into the phloem prior to sugar 
transport throughout the plant.
(c) H+ and cotransport of ions. 
Cotransport mechanisms involving 
H+ also participate in regulating
ion fluxes into and out of cells. For 
example, H+/NO3– cotransporters 
in the plasma membranes of root 
cells are important for the uptake of 
NO3– by plant roots.
(d) Ion channels. Plant ion 
channels open and close in 
response to voltage, stretching of 
the membrane, and chemical 
factors. When open, ion channels 
allow specific ions to diffuse across 
membranes. For example, a K+ ion 
channel is involved in the release 
of K+ from guard cells when 
stomata close.
Hydrogen ion
H+/NO3–
cotransporter
H+/sucrose
cotransporter
NO3– NO3
– NO3– 
NO3
– 
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
Proton pump
. Figure 36.6 Solute transport across plant cell plasma membranes.
? Assume that a plant cell has all four of the plasma membrane transport proteins shown above 
and that you have a specific inhibitor for each protein. Predict the effect of each inhibitor on the cell’s 
membrane potential.
examined in the Scientific Skills Exercise, which explores the 
effect of temperature on this process.
Water potential is abbreviated by the Greek letter /uni03A8 (psi, 
pronounced “sigh”). Plant biologists measure /uni03A8 in a unit of 
pressure called a megapascal (abbreviated MPa). By defini-
tion, the /uni03A8 of pure water in a container open to the atmosphere 
under standard conditions (at sea level and at room tempera-
ture) is 0 MPa. One MPa is equal to about 10 times atmospheric 
pressure at sea level. The internal pressure of a living plant cell 
due to the osmotic uptake of water is approximately 0.5 MPa, 
about twice the air pressure inside an inflated car tire.
How Solutes and Pressure  
Affect Water Potential
Solute concentration and physical 
pressure are the major determinants 
of water potential in hydrated plants, 
as expressed in the water potential 
equation:
/uni03A8=/uni03A8S + /uni03A8P
where /uni03A8 is the water potential, /uni03A8S is 
the solute potential (osmotic poten-
tial), and /uni03A8P is the pressure potential. 
The solute potential (/uni03A8S) of a solu-
tion is directly proportional to its 
molarity. Solute potential is also called 
osmotic potential because solutes affect 
the direction of osmosis. The solutes in 
plants are typically mineral ions and 
sugars. By definition, the /uni03A8S of pure 
water is 0. When solutes are added, 
they bind water molecules. As a result, 
there are fewer free water molecules, 
reducing the capacity of the water to 
move and do work. In this way, an 
increase in solute concentration has 
a negative effect on water potential, 
which is why the /uni03A8S of a solution is 
always expressed as a negative num-
ber. For example, a 0.1 M solution of 
a sugar has a /uni03A8S of -0.23 M Pa. As the 
solute concentration increases, /uni03A8S will 
become more negative.
Pressure potential (/uni03A8P) is the 
physical pressure on a solution. 
Unlike /uni03A8S, /uni03A8P can be positive or nega-
tive relative to atmospheric  pressure. 
For example, when a solution is 
being withdrawn by a syringe, it is 
under negative pressure; when it  
is being expelled from a syringe, it is 
under positive pressure. The water in 
living cells is usually under positive 
pressure due to the osmotic uptake of water. Specifically, the 
protoplast (the living part of the cell, which also includes 
the plasma membrane) presses against the cell wall, creat-
ing what is known as turgor pressure. This pushing effect 
of internal pressure, much like the air in an inflated tire, is 
critical for plant function because it helps maintain the stiff-
ness of plant tissues and also serves as the driving force for 
cell elongation. Conversely, the water in the hollow nonliv-
ing xylem cells (tracheids and vessel elements) of a plant is 
often under a negative pressure potential (tension) of less 
than -2 M Pa.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   843 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 845 ===

844 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
As you learn to apply the water potential equation, keep in 
mind the key point: Water moves from regions of higher water 
potential to regions of lower water potential.
Water Movement Across Plant Cell Membranes
Now let’s consider how water potential affects absorption and 
loss of water by a living plant cell. First, imagine a cell that is 
flaccid (limp) as a result of losing water. The cell has a /uni03A8P of 0 
MPa. Suppose this flaccid cell is bathed in a solution of higher 
solute concentration (more negative solute potential) than 
the cell itself (Figure 36.7a). Since the external solution has 
the lower (more negative) water potential, water diffuses out 
of the cell. The cell’s protoplast undergoes plasmolysis—that 
is, it shrinks and pulls away from the cell wall. If we place the 
same flaccid cell in pure water 1/uni03A8=0 MPa2 (Figure 36.7b), 
the cell, because it contains solutes, has a lower water poten-
tial than the water, and water enters the cell by osmosis. The 
contents of the cell begin to swell and press the plasma mem-
brane against the cell wall. The partially elastic wall, exerting 
turgor pressure, confines the pressurized protoplast. When 
this pressure is enough to offset the tendency for water to 
enter because of the solutes 
in the cell, then /uni03A8P and /uni03A8S 
are equal, and /uni03A8=0. 
This matches the water 
potential of the extra-
cellular environment—
in this example, 0 MPa. 
A dynamic equilibrium 
has been reached, and 
there is no further net 
movement of water.
In contrast to a flaccid 
cell, a walled cell with a greater 
solute concentration than its 
surroundings is turgid, or very 
firm. When turgid cells in a 
nonwoody tissue push against 
each other, the tissue is stiff-
ened. The effects of turgor 
loss are seen during wilting, 
when leaves and stems droop as 
a result of cells losing water.
Aquaporins: Facilitating Diffusion of Water
A difference in water potential determines the direction of 
water movement across membranes, but how do water mol-
ecules actually cross the membranes? Water molecules are 
small enough to diffuse across the phospholipid bilayer, even 
though the bilayer’s interior is hydrophobic. However, their 
movement across biological membranes is too rapid to be 
explained by unaided diffusion. Transport proteins called 
aquaporins (see Figure 8.10 and Concept 8.2) facilitate the 
Calculating and Interpreting 
Temperature Coefficients
Does the Initial Uptake of Water by Seeds Depend on 
Temperature? One way to answer this question is to soak seeds in 
water at different temperatures and measure the rate of water up-
take at each temperature. The data can be used to calculate the tem-
perature coefficient, Q10, the factor by which a physiological reaction 
(or process) rate increases when the temperature is raised by 10°C:
where t2 is the higher temperature (°C), t1 is the lower temperature, 
k2 is the reaction (or process) rate at t2, and k1 is the reaction (or 
process) rate at t1. (If t2-t1=10, as here, the math is simplified.)
Q10 values may be used to make inferences about the physi-
ological process under investigation. Chemical (metabolic) proces-
ses involving large-scale protein shape changes are highly de pen-
dent on temperature and have higher Q10 values, closer to 2 or 3.  
In contrast, many, but not all, physical parameters are relatively 
independent of temperature and have Q10 values closer to 1. For 
example, the Q10 of the change in the viscosity of water is 1.2–1.3. 
In this exercise, you will calculate Q10 using data from radish seeds 
(Raphanus sativum) to assess whether the initial uptake of water 
by seeds is more likely to be a physical or a chemical process.
How the Experiment Was Done Samples of radish seeds were 
weighed and placed in water at four different temperatures. 
After 30 minutes, the seeds were removed, blotted dry, and re-
weighed. The researchers then calculated the percent increase in 
mass due to water uptake for each sample.
Data from the Experiment
Temperature
% Increase in Mass Due to Water Uptake 
After 30 Minutes
5°C 18.5
15°C 26.0
25°C 31.0
35°C 36.2
Data from J. D. Murphy and D. L. Noland, Temperature effects on seed imbibition and 
leakage mediated by viscosity and membranes, Plant Physiology 69:428–431 (1982).
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. Based on the data, does the initial uptake of water by radish 
seeds vary with temperature? What is the relationship be-
tween temperature and water uptake?
2. (a) Using the data for 35°C and 25°C, calculate Q10 for water 
uptake by radish seeds. Repeat the calculation using the data for 
25°C and 15°C and the data for 15°C and 5°C. (b) What is the av-
erage Q10? (c) Do your results imply that the uptake of water by 
radish seeds is mainly a physical process or a chemical (metabolic) 
process? (d) Given that the Q10 for the change in the viscosity 
of water is 1.2–1.3, could the slight temperature dependence of 
water uptake by seeds be a reflection of the slight temperature 
dependence of the viscosity of water?
3. Besides temperature, what other independent variables could 
you alter to test whether radish seed swelling is essentially a 
physical process or a chemical process?
4. Would you expect plant growth to have a Q10 closer to 1 or 3? Why?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Scientific Skills Exercise
Q10  5 k2
10
t2–t1
k1
Wilted
Turgid
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   844 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 846 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 845
experiences help us understand how the structures of plant 
cells specialized for bulk flow fit their function. Like unclog-
ging a drain, the absence or reduction of cytoplasm in a 
plant’s “plumbing” facilitates bulk flow through the xylem 
and phloem. Bulk flow is also enhanced by the perforation 
plates at the ends of vessel elements and the porous sieve 
plates connecting sieve-tube elements.
Diffusion, active transport, and bulk flow act in concert to 
transport resources throughout the whole plant. For example, 
bulk flow due to a pressure difference is the mechanism of 
long-distance transport of sugars in the phloem, but active 
transport of sugar at the cellular level maintains this pres-
sure difference. In the next three sections, we’ll examine in 
more detail the transport of water and minerals from roots to 
shoots, the control of evaporation, and the transport of sugars.
transport of water molecules across plant cell plasma mem-
branes. Aquaporin channels, which can open and close, affect 
the rate at which water moves osmotically across the mem-
brane. Their permeability is decreased by increases in cyto-
solic Ca2+ or decreases in cytosolic pH.
Long-Distance Transport: 
The Role of Bulk Flow
Diffusion is an effective transport mechanism over the spatial 
scales typically found at the cellular level. However, diffusion 
is much too slow to function in long-distance transport within 
a plant. Although diffusion from one end of a cell to the other 
takes just seconds, diffusion from the roots to the top of a 
giant redwood would take several centuries. Instead, long-
distance transport occurs through bulk flow, the movement 
of liquid in response to a pressure gradient. The bulk flow of 
material always occurs from higher to lower pressure. Unlike 
osmosis, bulk flow is independent of solute concentration.
Long-distance bulk flow occurs within specialized cells in 
the vascular tissue, namely, the tracheids and vessel elements 
of the xylem and the sieve-tube elements of the phloem. In 
leaves, the branching of veins ensures that no cell is more 
than a few cells away from the vascular tissue (Figure 36.8).
The structures of the conducting cells of the xylem and 
phloem facilitate bulk flow. Mature tracheids and vessel ele-
ments are dead cells and therefore have no cytoplasm, and 
the cytoplasm of sieve-tube elements (also called sieve-tube 
members) is almost devoid of organelles (see Figure 35.10). 
If you have dealt with a partially clogged drain, you know 
that the volume of flow depends on the pipe’s diameter. 
Clogs reduce the effective diameter of the drainpipe. Such 
Initial flaccid cell:
Environment
0.4 M sucrose solution:
(a)
Environment
Pure water:
°S
°P
°
0
0
0 MPa
°P
°S
° 20.9 MPa
0
20.9
Final plasmolyzed cell
at osmotic equilibrium
with its surroundings:
5
5
°P
°S
° 20.9 MPa
0
20.9
Final turgid cell
at osmotic equilibrium
with its surroundings:
°P
°S
° 0 MPa
0.7
20.7
°P
°S
0
20.7
Initial flaccid cell:
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
°P
°S
° 20.7 MPa 5° 20.7 MPa
0
20.7
Initial conditions: cellular ° . environmental °. The 
protoplast loses water, and the cell plasmolyzes. After 
plasmolysis is complete, the water potentials of the cell
and its surroundings are the same. 
(b)Initial conditions: cellular ° , environmental °. Net uptake 
of water by osmosis makes the cell turgid. When this tendency 
for water to enter is offset by the back pressure of the elastic 
wall, water potentials are equal for the cell and its surroundings.   
. Figure 36.7 Water relations in plant cells. In these experiments, flaccid cells (cells in which the 
protoplast contacts the cell wall but lacks turgor pressure) are placed in two environments. The blue arrows 
indicate initial net water movement.
 Mastering Biology Video: Plasmolysis
VISUAL SKILLS In this leaf, what is the maximum number of cells  
any mesophyll cell is from a vein?
Cell
. Figure 36.8 Venation in an aspen leaf. The finer and finer 
branching of leaf veins in eudicot leaves ensures that no leaf cell is far 
removed from the vascular system.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   845 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 847 ===

846 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
endodermis, the innermost layer of cells in the root cortex, 
functions as a last checkpoint for the selective passage of min-
erals from the cortex into the vascular cylinder (Figure 36.9). 
Minerals already in the symplast when they reach the endo-
dermis continue through the plasmodesmata of endodermal 
cells and pass into the vascular cylinder. These minerals were 
already screened by the plasma membrane they had to cross 
to enter the symplast in the epidermis or cortex.
Minerals that reach the endodermis via the apoplast 
encounter a dead end that blocks their passage into the 
vascular cylinder. This barrier, located in the transverse 
and radial walls of each endodermal cell, is the Casparian 
strip, a belt made of suberin, a waxy material impervious 
to water and dissolved minerals (see Figure 36.9). Because 
of the Casparian strip, water and minerals cannot cross the 
endodermis and enter the vascular cylinder via the apo-
plast. Instead, water and minerals that are passively moving 
through the apoplast must cross the selectively permeable 
plasma membrane of an endodermal cell before they can 
enter the vascular cylinder. In this way, the endodermis trans-
ports needed minerals from the soil into the xylem and keeps 
many unneeded or toxic substances out. The endodermis also 
prevents solutes that have accumulated in the xylem from 
leaking back into the soil solution.
The last segment in the soil-to-xylem pathway is the 
passage of water and minerals into the tracheids and vessel 
elements of the xylem. These water-conducting cells lack 
protoplasts when mature and are therefore parts of the 
apoplast. Endodermal cells, as well as living cells within the 
vascular cylinder, discharge minerals from their protoplasts 
into their own cell walls. Both diffusion and active transport 
are involved in this transfer of solutes from the symplast to 
the apoplast, and the water and minerals can now enter the 
tracheids and vessel elements, where they are transported to 
the shoot system by bulk flow.
Bulk Flow Transport via the Xylem
Water and minerals from the soil enter the plant through the 
epidermis of roots, cross the root cortex, and pass into the 
vascular cylinder. From there the xylem sap, the water and 
dissolved minerals in the xylem, is transported long distances 
by bulk flow to the veins that branch throughout each leaf. As 
noted earlier, bulk flow is much faster than diffusion or active 
transport. Peak velocities in the transport of xylem sap can 
range from 15 to 45 m/hr for trees with wide vessel elements. 
The stems and leaves depend on this rapid delivery system for 
their supply of water and minerals.
The process of transporting xylem sap involves the loss of 
an astonishing amount of water by transpiration, the loss 
of water vapor from leaves and other aerial parts of the plant. 
A single maize plant, for example, transpires 60 L of water (the 
equivalent of 170 12-ounce bottles) during a growing season.  
Transpiration drives the transport 
of water and minerals from roots 
to shoots via the xylem
Picture yourself struggling to carry a 19-liter (5-gallon) con-
tainer of water weighing 19 kilograms (42 pounds) up sev-
eral flights of stairs. Imagine doing this 40 times a day. Then 
consider the fact that an average-sized tree, despite having 
neither heart nor muscle, transports a similar volume of 
water effortlessly on a daily basis. How do trees accomplish 
this feat? To answer this question, we’ll follow each step in 
the journey of water and minerals from roots to leaves.
Absorption of Water and Minerals by Root Cells
Although all living plant cells absorb nutrients across their 
plasma membranes, the cells near the tips of roots are par-
ticularly important because most of the absorption of water 
and minerals occurs there. In this region, the epidermal cells 
are permeable to water, and many are differentiated into root 
hairs, modified cells that account for much of the absorption 
of water by roots (see Figure 35.3). The root hairs absorb the 
soil solution, which consists of water molecules and dissolved 
mineral ions that are not bound tightly to soil particles. The 
soil solution is drawn into the hydrophilic walls of epidermal 
cells and passes freely along the cell walls and the extracellu-
lar spaces into the root cortex. This flow enhances the expo-
sure of the cells of the cortex to the soil solution, providing a 
much greater membrane surface area for absorption than the 
surface area of the epidermis alone. Although the soil solu-
tion usually has a low mineral concentration, active transport 
enables roots to accumulate essential minerals, such as K+, to 
concentrations hundreds of times greater than in the soil.
Transport of Water and Minerals into the Xylem
Water and minerals that pass from the soil into the root 
cortex cannot be transported to the rest of the plant until 
they enter the xylem of the vascular cylinder, or stele. The 
CONCEPT CHECK 36.2
1. If a plant cell immersed in distilled water has a /uni03A8S of  
-0.9 MPa and a /uni03A8 of 0 MPa, what is the cell’s /uni03A8P? If you put 
it in an open beaker of solution that has a /uni03A8 of -0.5 MPa, 
what would be its /uni03A8P at equilibrium?
2. How would a reduction in the number of aquaporin 
 channels affect a plant cell’s ability to adjust to new osmotic 
conditions?
3. Why do the leaves and stems of water-stressed plants droop?
4. WHAT IF? What would happen if you put plant protoplastsin 
pure water? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
CONCEPT 36.3
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   846 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 848 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 847
Water flows in from the root cortex, generating root 
pressure, a push of xylem sap. The root pressure sometimes 
causes more water to enter the leaves than is transpired, 
resulting in guttation, the exudation of water droplets 
that can be seen in the morning on the tips or edges of 
some plant leaves (Figure 36.10). Guttation fluid should 
not be confused with dew, which is condensed atmospheric 
moisture.
A maize crop growing at a typical density of 60,000 plants 
per hectare transpires almost 4 million L of water per hect-
are (about 400,000 gallons of water per acre) every growing 
season. If the transpired water is not replaced by water trans-
ported up from the roots, the leaves will wilt, and the plants 
will eventually die.
Xylem sap rises to heights of more than 120 m in the tall-
est trees. Is the sap mainly pushed upward from the roots, or is 
it mainly pulled upward? Let’s evaluate the relative contribu-
tions of these two mechanisms.
Pushing Xylem Sap: Root Pressure
At night, when there is almost no transpiration, root cells 
continue actively pumping mineral ions into the xylem of 
the vascular cylinder. Meanwhile, the Casparian strip of the 
endodermis prevents the ions from leaking back out into 
the cortex and soil. The resulting accumulation of miner-
als lowers the water potential within the vascular cylinder. 
Vessels
(xylem)
Epidermis
Cortex
Endodermis Vascular 
cylinder
(stele)
Root 
hair
Plasma
membrane
Symplastic
route
Apoplastic
route
Casparian strip
Pathway along
apoplast 
Pathway
through
symplast
Plasmodesmata
Casparian strip
Water
moves
upward
in vascular
cylinder
Endodermal cell
4
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
Apoplastic route. Uptake
of soil solution by the 
hydrophilic walls of root hairs 
provides access to the apoplast. 
Water and minerals can then 
diffuse into the cortex along 
this matrix of walls and
extracellular spaces.
Symplastic route. Minerals 
and water that cross the 
plasma membranes of root
hairs can enter the symplast.
Transmembrane route. As 
soil solution moves along the
apoplast, some water and
minerals are transported into
the protoplasts of cells of the
epidermis and cortex and then
move inward via the symplast.
The endodermis: controlled entry to the vascular cylinder (stele). 
Within the transverse and radial walls of each endodermal cell is the Casparian 
strip, a belt of waxy material (purple band) that blocks the passage of water 
and dissolved minerals. Only minerals already in the symplast or entering that  
pathway by crossing the plasma membrane of an endodermal cell can detour  
around the Casparian strip and pass into the vascular cylinder (stele).
Transport in the xylem. Endodermal cells and also 
living cells within the vascular cylinder discharge water
and minerals into their walls (apoplast). The xylem
vessels then transport the water and minerals by bulk
flow upward into the shoot system.
5
3
4 5
. Figure 36.9 Transport of water and minerals from root hairs to the xylem.
VISUAL SKILLS After studying the figure, explain how the Casparian 
strip forces water and minerals to pass through the plasma membranes 
of endodermal cells.
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
BioFlix® Animation: Water Transport from Soil into Roots
c Figure 36.10  
Guttation. Root pressure 
is forcing excess water 
from this strawberry leaf.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   847 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 849 ===

848 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
a hypothesis that remains the leading explanation of the 
ascent of xylem sap. According to their cohesion-tension 
hypothesis, transpiration provides the pull for the ascent 
of xylem sap, and the cohesion of water molecules trans-
mits this pull along the entire length of the xylem from 
shoots to roots. Hence, xylem sap is normally under nega-
tive pressure, or tension. Since transpiration is a “pulling” 
process, our exploration of the rise of xylem sap by the 
cohesion-tension mechanism begins not with the roots but 
with the leaves, where the driving force for transpirational 
pull begins.
Transpirational Pull Stomata on a leaf’s surface lead to a 
maze of internal air spaces that expose the mesophyll cells to 
the CO2 they need for photosynthesis. The air in these spaces 
is saturated with water vapor because it is in contact with the 
moist walls of the cells. On most days, the air outside the leaf 
is drier; that is, it has lower water potential than the air inside 
the leaf. Therefore, water vapor in the air spaces of a leaf dif-
fuses down its water potential gradient and exits the leaf via 
the stomata. It is this loss of water vapor by diffusion and 
evaporation that we call transpiration.
But how does loss of water vapor from the leaf translate 
into a pulling force for upward movement of water through 
a plant? The negative pressure potential that causes water 
to move up through the xylem develops at the surface of 
mesophyll cell walls in the leaf (Figure 36.11). The cell wall 
acts like a very thin capillary network. Water adheres to the 
cellulose microfibrils and other hydrophilic components 
In most plants, root pressure is a minor mechanism driv-
ing the ascent of xylem sap, pushing water only a few meters 
at most. The positive pressures produced are simply too weak 
to overcome the gravitational force of the water column in 
the xylem, particularly in tall plants. Many plants do not 
generate any root pressure or do so only during part of the 
growing season. Even in plants that display guttation, root 
pressure cannot keep pace with transpiration after sunrise. 
For the most part, xylem sap is not pushed from below by 
root pressure but is pulled up.
Pulling Xylem Sap:  
The Cohesion-Tension Hypothesis
As we have seen, root pressure, which depends on the active 
transport of solutes by plants, is only a minor force in the 
ascent of xylem sap. Far from depending on the metabolic 
activity of cells, most of the xylem sap that rises through a tree 
does not even require living cells to do so. As demonstrated 
by Eduard Strasburger in 1891, leafy stems with their lower 
end immersed in toxic solutions of copper sulfate or acid will 
readily draw these poisons up if the stem is cut below the 
surface of the liquid. As the toxic solutions ascend, they kill 
all living cells in their path, eventually arriving in the trans-
piring leaves and killing the leaf cells as well. Nevertheless, as 
Strasburger noted, the uptake of the toxic solutions and the 
loss of water from the dead leaves can continue for weeks.
In 1894, a few years after Strasburger’s findings, two 
Irish scientists, John Joly and Henry Dixon, put forward 
Stoma
Airspace
Cuticle
Upper
epidermis
Lower
epidermis
Mesophyll
Mesophyll cell
VacuoleCell wall
Cuticle
1     In transpiration, water vapor (shown as blue dots) 
diffuses from the moist air spaces of the leaf to the 
drier air outside via stomata.
     At first, the water vapor lost by 
transpiration is replaced by 
evaporation from the water film 
that coats mesophyll cells.
3
3
     The evaporation of the water 
film causes the air-water 
interface to retreat farther into 
the cell wall and to become 
more curved. This curvature 
increases the surface tension 
and the rate of transpiration.
     Water from the xylem is pulled into 
the surrounding cells and air spaces to 
replace the water that was lost.
Xylem
Microfibril
(cross section)
Water
film
Microfibrils in 
cell wall of 
mesophyll cell
Air-water
interface
2
45      The increased surface tension 
shown in step      pulls water from 
surrounding cells and air spaces.
. Figure 36.11 Generation of transpirational pull. Negative pressure (tension) at the air-water 
interface in the leaf is the basis of transpirational pull, which draws water out of the xylem.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Transpiration
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   848 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 850 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 849
without the water molecules separating. Water molecules 
exiting the xylem in the leaf tug on adjacent water molecules, 
and this pull is relayed, molecule by molecule, down the 
entire column of water in the xylem. Meanwhile, the strong 
adhesion of water molecules (again by hydrogen bonds) to 
the hydrophilic walls of xylem cells helps offset the down-
ward force of gravity.
The upward pull on the sap creates tension within the 
vessel elements and tracheids, which are like elastic pipes. 
Positive pressure causes an elastic pipe to swell, whereas 
tension pulls the walls of the pipe inward. On a warm day, a 
decrease in the diameter of a tree trunk can even be measured. 
of the cell wall. As water evaporates 
from the water film that covers the 
cell walls of mesophyll cells, the air-
water interface retreats farther into 
the cell wall. Because of the high sur-
face tension of water, the curvature 
of the interface induces a tension, 
or negative pressure potential, in 
the water. As more water evaporates 
from the cell wall, the curvature of 
the air-water interface increases and 
the pressure of the water becomes 
more negative. Water molecules 
from the more hydrated parts of 
the leaf are then pulled toward this 
area, reducing the tension. These 
pulling forces are transferred to the 
xylem because each water molecule 
is cohesively bound to the next by 
hydrogen bonds. Thus, transpira-
tional pull depends on several of 
the properties of water discussed in 
Concept 3.2: adhesion, cohesion, and 
surface tension.
The role of negative pressure poten-
tial in transpiration is consistent with 
the water potential equation because 
negative pressure potential (tension) 
lowers water potential. Because 
water moves from areas of higher 
water potential to areas of lower water 
potential, the more negative pressure 
potential at the air-water interface 
causes water in xylem cells to be 
“pulled” into mesophyll cells, which 
lose water to the air spaces, the water 
diffusing out through stomata. In this 
way, the negative water potential of 
leaves provides the “pull” in transpi-
rational pull. The transpirational pull 
on xylem sap is transmitted all the way from the leaves to the 
young roots and even into the soil solution (Figure 36.12).
Cohesion and Adhesion in the Ascent of Xylem Sap  
Cohesion and adhesion facilitate the transport of water by 
bulk flow. Cohesion is the attractive force between molecules 
of the same substance. Water has an unusually high cohesive 
force due to the hydrogen bonds each water molecule can po-
tentially make with other water molecules. Water’s cohesive 
force within the xylem gives it a tensile strength equivalent to 
that of a steel wire of similar diameter. The cohesion of water 
makes it possible to pull a column of xylem sap from above 
Transpiration
Cohesion and
adhesion in
the xylem
Xylem
sap
27.0 MPa
2100.0 MPa
Leaf ° (cell walls)
    521.0 MPa
Trunk xylem °
    52 0.8 MPa
Trunk xylem °
    52 0.6 MPa
Soil ° Y
    52 0.3 MPa
Mesophyll
cells
Stoma
Water
molecule
Atmosphere
Adhesion
by hydrogen
bonding
Cell
wall
Xylem
cells
Cohesion
by hydrogen
bonding
Water
molecule
Root
hair
Soil
particle
Water
Water uptake
from soil 
Water potential gradient
Outside air ° Y
    5
Leaf ° (air spaces)
    5
. Figure 36.12 Ascent of xylem sap. Hydrogen bonding forms an unbroken chain of water 
molecules extending from leaves to the soil. The force driving the ascent of xylem sap is a gradient 
of water potential (/uni03A8). For bulk flow over long distance, the /uni03A8 gradient is due mainly to a gradient 
of the pressure potential (/uni03A8P). Transpiration results in the /uni03A8P at the leaf end of the xylem being 
lower than the /uni03A8P at the root end. The /uni03A8 values shown at the left are a “snapshot.” They may vary 
during daylight, but the direction of the /uni03A8 gradient remains the same.
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Transpiration-Cohesion-Tension Mechanism 
Animation: Transport of Xylem Sap  
BioFlix® Animation: Water Transport from Roots to Leaves
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   849 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 851 ===

850 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
mesophyll cells and by lowering the water potential in the air 
spaces within a leaf. Thus, the ascent of xylem sap, like the 
process of photosynthesis, is ultimately solar powered.
As transpirational pull puts the vessel elements and tracheids 
under tension, their thick secondary walls prevent them 
from collapsing, much as wire rings maintain the shape of 
a vacuum-cleaner hose. The tension produced by transpira-
tional pull lowers water potential in the root xylem to such an 
extent that water flows passively from the soil, across the root 
cortex, and into the vascular cylinder.
Transpirational pull can extend down to the roots only 
through an unbroken chain of water molecules. Cavitation, 
the formation of a water vapor pocket, breaks the chain. It is 
more common in wide vessel elements than in tracheids and 
can occur during drought stress or when xylem sap freezes 
in winter. The air bubbles resulting from cavitation expand 
and block water channels of the xylem. The rapid expansion 
of air bubbles produces clicking noises that can be heard by 
placing sensitive microphones at the surface of the stem.
The interruption of xylem sap transport by cavitation 
is not always permanent. The chain of water molecules can 
detour around the air bubbles through pits between adjacent 
tracheids or vessel elements (see Figure 35.10). Moreover, 
root pressure enables small plants to refill blocked vessel 
elements. Recent evidence suggests that cavitation may even 
be repaired when the xylem sap is under negative pressure, 
although the mechanism by which this occurs is uncertain. 
In addition, secondary growth adds a layer of new xylem each 
year. Only the youngest, outermost secondary xylem layers 
transport water. Although the older secondary xylem no 
longer transports water, it does provide support for the tree 
(see Figure 35.22).
Xylem Sap Ascent by Bulk Flow: A Review
The cohesion-tension mechanism that transports xylem 
sap against gravity is an excellent example of how physical 
principles apply to biological processes. In the long-distance 
transport of water from roots to leaves by bulk flow, the 
movement of fluid is driven by a water potential difference at 
opposite ends of xylem tissue. The water potential difference 
is created at the leaf end of the xylem by the evaporation of 
water from leaf cells. Evaporation lowers the water potential 
at the air-water interface, thereby generating the negative 
pressure (tension) that pulls water through the xylem.
Bulk flow in the xylem differs from diffusion in some key 
ways. First, it is driven by differences in pressure potential (/uni03A8P);  
solute potential (/uni03A8S) is not a factor. Therefore, the water 
potential gradient within the xylem is essentially a pressure 
gradient. Also, the flow does not occur across plasma mem-
branes of living cells, but instead within hollow, dead cells. 
Furthermore, it moves the entire solution together—not just 
water or solutes—and at much greater speed than diffusion.
The plant expends no energy to lift xylem sap by bulk flow. 
Instead, the absorption of sunlight drives most of transpira-
tion by causing water to evaporate from the moist walls of 
 Mastering Biology BioFlix® Animation: Water Transport  
in Plants
CONCEPT CHECK 36.3
1. A horticulturalist notices that when Zinnia flowers are cut 
at dawn, a small drop of water collects at the surface of the 
rooted stump. However, when the flowers are cut at noon, 
no drop is observed. Suggest an explanation.
2. WHAT IF? Suppose an Arabidopsis mutant lacking func-
tional aquaporin proteins has a root mass three times greater 
than that of wild-type plants. Suggest an explanation.
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS How are the Casparian strip and 
tight junctions similar (see Figure 7.30)?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
The rate of transpiration  
is regulated by stomata
Leaves generally have large surface areas and high surface-to-
volume ratios. The large surface area enhances light absorption 
for photosynthesis. The high surface-to-volume ratio aids in 
CO2 absorption during photosynthesis as well as in the release 
of O2, a by-product of photosynthesis. Upon diffusing through 
the stomata, CO2 enters a honeycomb of air spaces formed by 
the spongy mesophyll cells (see Figure 35.18). Because of the 
irregular shapes of these cells, the leaf’s internal surface area 
may be 10 to 30 times greater than the external surface area.
Although large surface areas and high surface-to-volume 
ratios increase the rate of photosynthesis, they also increase 
water loss by way of the stomata. Thus, a plant’s tremendous 
requirement for water is largely a consequence of the shoot 
system’s need for ample exchange of CO2 and O2 for photo-
synthesis. By opening and closing the stomata, guard cells 
help balance the plant’s requirement to conserve water with 
its requirement for photosynthesis.
Stomata: Major Pathways for Water Loss
About 95% of the water a plant loses escapes through 
stomata, although these pores account for only 1–2% of 
the external leaf surface. The waxy cuticle limits water 
loss through the remaining surface of the leaf. Each stoma 
is flanked by a pair of guard cells. Guard cells control the 
diameter of the stoma by changing shape, thereby widening 
or narrowing the gap between the guard cell pair. Under the 
same environmental conditions, the amount of water lost per 
leaf depends largely on stomatal density (Figure 36.13) and 
the average size of the stomatal pores.
CONCEPT 36.4
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   850 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 852 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 851
(membrane potential) drives K+ into the cell through specific 
membrane channels. The absorption of K+ causes the water 
potential to become more negative within the guard cells, 
and the cells become more turgid as water enters by osmosis. 
Because most of the K+ and water are stored in the vacuole, 
the vacuolar membrane also plays a role in regulating guard 
Stomatal density can be under both genetic and environ-
mental control. As a result of evolution by natural selection, 
shade-tolerant species tend to have lower stomatal densities 
than shade-intolerant species because CO2 uptake doesn’t 
limit photosynthesis under shady conditions. Stomatal 
density, however, can also be regulated by environmental 
changes. Low CO2 levels during leaf development, for exam-
ple, lead to increased stomatal densities in many species, an 
adaptation that facilitates CO2 uptake under these conditions. 
By measuring the stomatal density of leaf fossils, scientists 
have gained insight into the levels of atmospheric CO2 in past 
climates. A recent British survey found that stomatal density 
of many woodland species has decreased since 1927, when a 
similar survey was made. This observation is consistent with 
other findings that atmospheric CO2 levels increased dramati-
cally during the late 1900s.
Mechanisms of Stomatal Opening and Closing
When guard cells take in water from neighboring cells by 
osmosis, they become more turgid. In most angiosperm 
guard cells, the cell walls facing the stomatal pore are thicker, 
and the cellulose microfibrils are oriented in a direction 
that causes the guard cells to bow outward when turgid 
(Figure 36.14a). This bowing outward increases the size of the 
pore between the guard cells. When the cells lose water and 
become flaccid, they become less bowed, and the pore closes.
The changes in turgor pressure in guard cells result 
primarily from the reversible absorption and loss of K+. 
Stomata open when guard cells actively accumulate K+ from 
neighboring epidermal cells (Figure 36.14b). The flow of K+ 
across the plasma membrane of the guard cell is coupled to 
the generation of a membrane potential by proton pumps 
(see Figure 36.6a). Stomatal opening correlates with active 
transport of H+ out of the guard cell. The resulting voltage 
Vacuole
Guard cellChloroplast
Radially oriented 
cellulose microfibrils
Cell
wall
Nucleus
Guard cells turgid/Stoma open Guard cells flaccid/Stoma closed
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2OH2O
(a) Changes in guard cell shape and stomatal opening and closing 
(surface view). Guard cells of a typical angiosperm are illustrated in 
their turgid 
stoOa open and ﬂaccid 
stoOa closed states 6he radial 
orientation of cellulose OicroƂbrils in the cell walls causes the guard 
cells to increase Oore in length than width when turgor increases 
Since the two guard cells are tightly joined at their tips, they bow 
outward when turgid, causing the stoOatal pore to open
(b) Role of potassium ions (K+) in stomatal opening and closing. 
6he transport of -+ (symbolized here as red dots) across the plasma 
membrane and vacuolar membrane causes the turgor changes of 
guard cells 6he uptake of anions, such as Oalate and chloride ions 

not shown, also contributes to guard cell swelling 
H2O H2O
H2OH2O
-1 H2O
. Figure 36.14 Mechanisms of stomatal opening and closing.
. Figure 36.13 Partially open stomata in the epidermis of a 
bean (Phaseolus) leaf.
VISUAL SKILLS If the micrograph above is of a section of epidermis 
500 mm by 300 mm, what is the stomatal density of this bean leaf? Give 
your answer in number of stomata per square centimeter.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   851 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 853 ===

852 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
 Mastering Biology MP3 Tutor: Transpiration
the cuticle. Under prolonged drought conditions, leaves can 
become severely wilted and irreversibly injured.
Transpiration also results in evaporative cooling, which 
can lower a leaf’s temperature by as much as 10°C compared 
with the surrounding air. This cooling prevents the leaf from 
reaching temperatures that could denature enzymes involved 
in photosynthesis and other metabolic processes.
Adaptations That Reduce  
Evaporative Water Loss
Water availability is a major determinant of plant productiv-
ity. The main reason water availability is tied to plant produc-
tivity is not related to photosynthesis’s direct need for water 
as a substrate but rather because freely available water allows 
plants to keep stomata open and take up more CO2. The prob-
lem of reducing water loss is especially acute for desert plants. 
Plants adapted to arid environments are called xerophytes 
(from the Greek xero, dry).
Many species of desert plants avoid drying out by com-
pleting their short life cycles during the brief rainy seasons. 
Rain comes infrequently in deserts, but when it arrives, the 
vegetation is transformed as dormant seeds of annual spe-
cies quickly germinate and bloom, completing their life cycle 
before dry conditions return.
Other xerophytes have unusual physiological or morpho-
logical adaptations that enable them to withstand harsh desert 
conditions. The stems of many xerophytes are fleshy because 
they store water for use during long dry periods. Cacti have 
highly reduced leaves that resist excessive water loss; photo-
synthesis is carried out mainly in their stems. Another adapta-
tion common in arid habitats is crassulacean acid metabolism 
(CAM), a specialized form of photosynthesis found in succu-
lents of the family Crassulaceae and several other families (see 
Figure 11.20). Because the leaves of CAM plants take in CO2 
at night, the stomata can remain closed during the day, when 
evaporative stresses are greatest. Other examples of xerophytic 
adaptations are discussed in Figure 36.15.
cell dynamics. Stomatal closing results from a loss of K+ from 
guard cells to neighboring cells, which leads to an osmotic 
loss of water. Aquaporins also help regulate the osmotic swell-
ing and shrinking of guard cells.
Stimuli for Stomatal Opening and Closing
In general, stomata are open during the day and mostly 
closed at night, preventing the plant from losing water under 
conditions when photosynthesis cannot occur. At least three 
cues contribute to stomatal opening at dawn: light, CO2 
depletion, and an internal “clock” in guard cells.
Light stimulates guard cells to accumulate K+ and become tur-
gid. This response is triggered by illumination of blue-light recep-
tors in the plasma membrane of guard cells. Activation of these 
receptors stimulates the activity of proton pumps in the plasma 
membrane of the guard cells, in turn promoting absorption of K+.
Stomata also open in response to depletion of CO2 within 
the leaf’s air spaces as a result of photosynthesis. As CO2 
concentrations decrease during the day, the stomata progres-
sively open if sufficient water is supplied to the leaf.
An internal “clock” in the guard cells ensures that stomata 
continue their daily rhythm of opening and closing. This 
rhythm occurs even if a plant is kept in a dark location. All 
eukaryotic organisms have internal clocks that regulate cyclic 
processes. Cycles with intervals of approximately 24 hours are 
called circadian rhythms (which you’ll learn more about 
in Concept 39.3).
Drought stress can also cause stomata to close. A hormone 
called abscisic acid (ABA), which is produced in roots and 
leaves in response to water deficiency, signals guard cells to 
close stomata. This response reduces wilting but also restricts 
CO2 absorption, thereby slowing photosynthesis. ABA also 
directly inhibits photosynthesis. Water availability is closely 
tied to plant productivity not because water is needed as a 
substrate in photosynthesis, but because freely available water 
allows plants to keep stomata open and take up more CO2.
Guard cells control the photosynthesis-transpiration 
compromise on a moment-to-moment basis by integrating a 
variety of internal and external stimuli. Even the passage of 
a cloud or a transient shaft of sunlight through a forest can 
affect the rate of transpiration.
Effects of Transpiration on Wilting  
and Leaf Temperature
As long as most stomata remain open, transpiration is great-
est on a day that is sunny, warm, dry, and windy because 
these environmental factors increase evaporation. If transpi-
ration cannot pull sufficient water to the leaves, the shoot 
becomes slightly wilted as cells lose turgor pressure. Although 
plants respond to such mild drought stress by rapidly clos-
ing stomata, some evaporative water loss still occurs through 
CONCEPT CHECK 36.4
1. What are the stimuli that control the opening and closing 
of stomata?
2. The pathogenic fungus Fusicoccum amygdali secretes a 
toxin called fusicoccin that activates the plasma membrane 
proton pumps of plant cells and leads to uncontrolled water 
loss. Suggest a mechanism by which the activation of proton 
pumps could lead to severe wilting.
3. WHAT IF? If you buy cut flowers, why might the florist 
recommend cutting the stems underwater and then trans-
ferring the flowers to a vase while the cut ends are still wet?
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain why the evaporation of 
water from leaves lowers their temperature (see Concept 3.2).
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   852 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 854 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 853
Movement from Sugar Sources to Sugar Sinks
Sieve-tube elements are specialized cells in angiosperms that 
serve as conduits for translocation. Arranged end to end, 
they form long sieve tubes (see Figure 35.10). Between these 
cells are sieve plates, structures that allow the flow of sap 
along the sieve tube. Phloem sap, the aqueous solution that 
flows through sieve tubes, differs markedly from the xylem 
sap that is transported by tracheids and vessel elements. By 
far the most prevalent solute in phloem sap is sugar, typi-
cally sucrose in most species. The sucrose concentration may 
be as high as 30% by weight, giving the sap a syrupy thick-
ness. Phloem sap may also contain amino acids, hormones, 
and minerals.
Sugars are transported from sources 
to sinks via the phloem
The unidirectional flow of water and minerals from soil to 
roots to leaves through the xylem is largely in an upward 
direction. In contrast, the movement of photosynthates 
often runs in the opposite direction, transporting sugars 
from mature leaves to lower parts of the plant, such as root 
tips that require large amounts of sugars for energy and 
growth. The transport of the products of photosynthesis, 
known as translocation, is carried out by another tissue, 
the phloem.
CONCEPT 36.5
. Oleander (Nerium oleander), shown in the inset, is commonly 
found in arid climates. Its leaves have a thick cuticle and 
multiple-layered epidermal tissue that reduce water loss. Stomata 
are recessed in cavities called “crypts,” an adaptation that 
reduces the rate of transpiration by protecting the stomata from 
hot, dry wind. Trichomes help minimize transpiration by breaking 
up the flow of air, allowing the chamber of the crypt to have a 
higher humidity than the surrounding atmosphere (LM).
c Ocotillo (Fouquieria 
splendens) is common in 
the southwestern region 
of the United States and 
northern Mexico. It is 
leafless during most of 
the year, thereby avoiding 
excessive water loss 
(right). Immediately after 
a heavy rainfall, it 
produces small leaves 
(below and inset). As the 
soil dries, the leaves 
quickly shrivel and die.
c The long, white hairlike 
bristles along the stem 
of the old man cactus 
(Cephalocereus senilis) 
help reflect the intense 
sunlight of the Mexican 
desert.
Thick cuticle Upper epidermal tissue
Lower epidermal 
tissue
Trichomes 
(“hairs”)
StomaCrypt
100 om
. Figure 36.15 Some xerophytic adaptations.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   853 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 855 ===

854 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
in Figure 36.16a, through companion cells. In some plants, 
the walls of the companion cells feature many ingrowths, 
enhancing solute transfer between apoplast and symplast.
In many plants, sugar movement into the phloem requires 
active transport because sucrose is more concentrated in 
sieve-tube elements and companion cells than in mesophyll. 
Proton pumping and H+>sucrose cotransport enable sucrose 
to move from mesophyll cells to sieve-tube elements or com-
panion cells (Figure 36.16b).
Sucrose is unloaded at the sink end of a sieve tube. The 
process varies by species and organ. However, the con-
centration of free sugar in the sink is always lower than 
in the sieve tube because the unloaded sugar is consumed 
during growth and metabolism of the cells of the sink or 
converted to insoluble polymers such as starch. As a result 
of this sugar concentration gradient, sugar molecules 
diffuse from the phloem into the sink tissues, and water 
follows by osmosis.
Bulk Flow by Positive Pressure:  
The Mechanism of Translocation  
in Angiosperms
Phloem sap flows from source to sink at rates that are as great  
as 1 m/hr, which is much faster than diffusion or cytoplasmic 
streaming. Researchers concluded that it moves through  
the sieve tubes of angiosperms by bulk flow driven by positive 
pressure, known as pressure flow (Figure 36.17). The building 
of pressure at the source and reduction of that pressure at the 
sink cause sap to flow from source to sink.
The pressure-flow hypothesis explains why phloem sap 
flows from source to sink, and experiments build a strong 
case for pressure flow as the mechanism of translocation in 
In contrast to the unidirectional transport of xylem sap 
from roots to leaves, phloem sap moves from sites of sugar 
production to sites of sugar use or storage (see Figure 36.2). 
A sugar source is a plant organ that is a net producer of 
sugar, by photosynthesis or by breakdown of starch. In 
contrast, a sugar sink is an organ that is a net consumer or 
depository of sugar. Growing roots, buds, stems, and fruits 
are sugar sinks. Although expanding leaves are sugar sinks, 
mature leaves, if well illuminated, are sugar sources. A stor-
age organ, such as a tuber or a bulb, may be a source or a 
sink, depending on the season. When stockpiling carbohy-
drates in the summer, it is a sugar sink. After breaking dor-
mancy in the spring, it is a sugar source because its starch 
is broken down to sugar, which is carried to the growing 
shoot tips.
Sinks usually receive sugar from the nearest sugar sources. 
The upper leaves on a branch, for example, may export sugar 
to the growing shoot tip, whereas the lower leaves may export 
sugar to the roots. A growing fruit may monopolize the sugar 
sources that surround it. For each sieve tube, the direction of 
transport depends on the locations of the sugar source and 
sugar sink that are connected by that tube. Therefore, neigh-
boring sieve tubes may carry sap in opposite directions if they 
originate and end in different locations.
Sugar must be transported, or loaded, into sieve-tube 
elements before being exported to sugar sinks. In some spe-
cies, it moves from mesophyll cells to sieve-tube elements 
via the symplast, passing through plasmodesmata. In other 
species, it moves by symplastic and apoplastic pathways. In 
maize leaves, for example, sucrose diffuses through the sym-
plast from photosynthetic mesophyll cells into small veins. 
Much of it then moves into the apoplast and is accumulated 
by nearby sieve-tube elements, either directly or, as shown 
Mesophyll cell
Cell walls (apoplast)
Plasma membrane
Plasmodesmata
Mesophyll cell
Bundle-
sheath cell
Companion
(transfer) cell
Phloem
parenchyma cell
Sieve-tube
element
(a)
High H+ concentration
Low H+ concentration
Sucrose
Cotransporter
Proton
pump
Apoplast
Symplast
Sucrose manufactured in mesophyll cells can travel via 
the symplast (blue arrows) to sieve-tube elements. In 
some species, sucrose exits the symplast near sieve 
tubes and travels through the apoplast (red arrow). It is 
then actively accumulated from the apoplast by 
sieve-tube elements and their companion cells.
(b)A chemiosmotic mechanism is responsible for the 
active transport of sucrose into companion cells and 
sieve-tube elements. Proton pumps generate an H+ 
gradient, which drives sucrose accumulation with the 
help of a cotransport protein that couples sucrose 
transport to the diffusion of H+ back into the cell.
H+ H+
H+
ATP
S
S
Key
. Figure 36.16 Loading of sucrose into phloem.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   854 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 856 ===

 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 855
 Mastering Biology Animation: Phloem Transport
1
2
34
1Loading of sugar (green 
dots) into the sieve 
tube at the source (in 
this example, a mesophyll 
cell in a leaf) reduces 
water potential inside the 
sieve-tube elements. This 
causes the tube to take 
up water by osmosis. 
2This uptake of water 
generates a positive 
pressure that forces 
the sap to flow along 
the tube.
3The pressure is relieved 
by the unloading of 
sugar and the 
consequent loss of 
water at the sink.
4In leaf-to-root 
translocation, xylem 
recycles water from 
sink to source.
Vessel
(xylem)
Sieve tube
(phloem)
Source cell
(leaf)
Sucrose
H2O
Sucrose
Sink cell
(storage
root)
H2O
H2O
Bulk flow by negative pressure 
      Bulk flow by positive pressure
. Figure 36.17 Bulk flow by positive pressure  
(pressure flow) in a sieve tube.
angiosperms (Figure 36.18). However, studies using electron 
microscopes suggest that in nonflowering vascular plants, the 
pores between phloem cells may be too small or obstructed to 
permit pressure flow.
Sinks vary in energy demands and capacity to unload 
sugars. Sometimes there are more sinks than can be 
supported by sources. In such cases, a plant might abort 
some flowers, seeds, or fruits—a phenomenon called 
self-thinning. Removing sinks can also be a horticulturally 
useful practice. For example, since large apples command 
a much better price than small ones, growers sometimes 
remove flowers or young fruits so that their trees produce 
fewer but larger apples.
CONCEPT CHECK 36.5
1. Compare and contrast the forces that move phloem sap and 
xylem sap over long distances.
2. Identify plant organs that are sugar sources, organs that are 
sugar sinks, and organs that might be either. Explain.
3. Why can xylem transport water and minerals using dead 
cells, whereas phloem requires living cells?
4. WHAT IF? Apple growers in Japan sometimes make a non-
lethal spiral slash around the bark of trees that are destined 
for removal after the growing season. This practice makes the 
apples sweeter. Why?
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
The symplast is highly dynamic
Although we have been discussing transport in mostly physi-
cal terms, almost like the flow of solutions through pipes, 
plant transport is a dynamic and finely tuned process that 
changes during development. A leaf, for example, may begin 
as a sugar sink but spend most of its life as a sugar source. 
Also, environmental changes may trigger responses in plant 
transport processes. Water stress may activate signal trans-
duction pathways that greatly alter the membrane transport 
proteins governing the overall transport of water and miner-
als. Because the symplast is living tissue, it is largely respon-
sible for the dynamic changes in plant transport processes. 
CONCEPT 36.6
Experiment The pressure-flow hypothesis predicts that 
phloem sap near sources should have a higher sugar content 
than phloem sap near sinks. To test this idea, researchers 
used aphids that feed on phloem sap. An aphid probes with 
a hypodermic-like mouthpart called a stylet that penetrates a 
sieve-tube element. As sieve-tube pressure forced out phloem 
sap into the stylets, the researchers separated the aphids 
from the stylets, which then acted as taps exuding sap for 
hours. Researchers measured the sugar concentration of sap 
from stylets at different points between a source and sink.
Aphid feeding
Sap
droplet
Separated stylet
exuding sap
Sap dropletStylet
25 om
Stylet in sieve-tube
element
Sieve-
tube
element
Results The closer the stylet was to a sugar source, the 
higher its sugar concentration was.
Conclusion The results of such experiments support the 
pressure-flow hypothesis, which predicts that sugar concentra-
tions should be higher in sieve tubes closer to sugar sources.
Data from S. Rogers and A. J. Peel, Some evidence for the existence of turgor 
pressure in the sieve tubes of willow (Salix), Planta 126:259–267 (1975).
WHAT IF? Spittlebugs (Clasirptora sp.) are xylem sap feeders that 
use strong muscles to pump xylem sap through their guts. Could you 
isolate xylem sap from the excised stylets of spittlebugs?
/uni25BC Figure 36.18 Inquiry
Does phloem sap contain more sugar near 
sources than near sinks?
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   855 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 857 ===

856 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
and RNAs, coordinate development between cells within 
each symplastic domain. If symplastic communication is dis-
rupted, development can be grossly affected.
Phloem: An Information Superhighway
In addition to transporting sugars, the phloem is a “super-
highway” for the transport of macromolecules and viruses. 
This transport is systemic (throughout the body), affecting 
many or all of the plant’s systems or organs. Macromolecules 
translocated through the phloem include proteins and vari-
ous types of RNA that enter the sieve tubes through plasmo-
desmata. Although they are often likened to the gap junc-
tions between animal cells, plasmodesmata are unique in 
their ability to traffic proteins and RNA.
Systemic communication through the phloem helps inte-
grate the functions of the whole plant. One classic example is 
the delivery of a flower-inducing chemical signal from leaves 
to vegetative meristems. Another is a defensive response 
to localized infection, in which chemical signals traveling 
through the phloem activate defense genes in noninfected 
tissues.
Electrical Signaling in the Phloem
Rapid, long-distance electrical signaling through the phloem 
is another dynamic feature of the symplast. Electrical signal-
ing has been studied extensively in plants that have rapid leaf 
movements, such as the sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) and 
Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula). However, its role in other 
species is less clear. Some studies have revealed that a stimu-
lus in one part of a plant can trigger an electrical signal in the 
phloem that affects another part, where it may elicit a change 
in gene transcription, respiration, photosynthesis, phloem 
unloading, or hormonal levels. Thus, the phloem can serve a 
nerve-like function, allowing for swift electrical communica-
tion between widely separated organs.
The coordinated transport of materials and information 
is central to plant survival. Plants can acquire only so many 
resources in the course of their lifetimes. Ultimately, the 
successful acquisition of these resources and their optimal 
distribution are the most critical determinants of whether the 
plant will compete successfully.
We’ll look now at some other examples: changes in plasmo-
desmata, chemical signaling, and electrical signaling.
Changes in Plasmodesmatal Number  
and Pore Size
Based mostly on the static images provided by electron 
microscopy, biologists formerly considered plasmodesmata 
to be unchanging, pore-like structures. More recent stud-
ies, however, have revealed that plasmodesmata are highly 
dynamic. They can open or close rapidly in response to 
changes in turgor pressure, cytosolic Ca2+ level, or cytosolic 
pH. Although some plasmodesmata form during cytokinesis, 
they can also form much later. Moreover, loss of function 
is common during differentiation. For example, as a leaf 
matures from a sink to a source, its plasmodesmata either 
close or are eliminated, causing phloem unloading to cease.
Early studies by plant physiologists and pathologists came 
to differing conclusions regarding pore sizes of plasmodes-
mata. Physiologists injected fluorescent probes of different 
molecular sizes into cells and recorded whether the molecules 
passed into adjacent cells. Based on these observations, they 
concluded that the pore sizes were approximately 2.5 nm—
too small for macromolecules such as proteins to pass. In 
contrast, pathologists provided electron micrographs show-
ing evidence of the passage of virus particles with diameters 
of 10 nm or greater (Figure 36.19).
Subsequently, it was learned that plant viruses produce 
viral movement proteins that cause the plasmodesmata to 
dilate, enabling the viral RNA to pass between cells. More 
recent evidence shows that plant cells themselves regulate 
plasmodesmata as part of a communication network. The 
viruses can subvert this network by mimicking the cell’s regu-
lators of plasmodesmata.
A high degree of cytosolic interconnectedness exists only 
within certain groups of cells and tissues, which are known as 
symplastic domains. Informational molecules, such as proteins 
 Mastering Biology  
Interview with Patricia Zambryski:  
Exploring the dynamics of plasmodesmata
Plasmodesma
Cell walls
Cytoplasm
of cell 2
Cytoplasm
of cell 1
Virus
particles
100 nm
. Figure 36.19 Virus particles moving cell to cell through 
plasmodesma connecting turnip leaf cells. (TEM)
CONCEPT CHECK 36.6
1. How do plasmodesmata differ from gap junctions?
2. Nerve-like signals in animals are thousands of times faster 
than their plant counterparts. Suggest a behavioral reason 
for the difference.
3. WHAT IF? Suppose plants were genetically modified to be 
unresponsive to viral movement proteins. Would this be a 
good way to prevent the spread of infection? Explain.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   856 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 858 ===

 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText,  
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
36 Chapter Review
Adaptations for acquiring resources were key steps in 
the evolution of vascular plants (pp. 839–841)
• Leaves typically function in 
gathering sunlight and CO2.  
Stems serve as supporting 
structures for leaves and as 
conduits for the long-distance 
transport of water and nutri-
ents. Roots mine the soil for 
water and minerals and an-
chor the whole plant.
• Natural selection has pro-
duced plant architectures that 
optimize resource acquisition 
in the ecological niche in 
which the plant species natu-
rally exists.
? How did the evolution of xylem and phloem contribute to the 
successful colonization of land by vascular plants?
CONCEPT 36.1
CONCEPT 36.2
Different mechanisms transport substances over short 
or long distances (pp. 841–846)
• The selective permeability of the plasma membrane controls the 
movement of substances into and out of cells. Both active and 
passive transport mechanisms occur in plants.
• Plant tissues have two major compartments: the apoplast 
(everything outside the cells’ plasma membranes) and the 
symplast (the cytosol and connecting plasmodesmata).
• Direction of water movement depends on the water potential, 
a quantity that incorporates solute concentration and physical 
pressure. The osmotic uptake of water by plant cells and the re-
sulting internal pressure that builds up make plant cells turgid.
• Long-distance transport occurs through bulk flow, the move-
ment of liquid in response to a pressure gradient. Bulk flow oc-
curs within the tracheids and vessel elements of the xylem and 
within the sieve-tube elements of the phloem.
? Is xylem sap usually pulled or pushed up the plant?
CONCEPT 36.3
Transpiration drives the transport of water and minerals 
from roots to shoots via the xylem (pp. 846–850)
• Water and minerals from the soil enter the plant through the 
epidermis of roots, cross the root cortex, and then pass into the 
vascular cylinder by way of the selectively permeable cells of 
the endodermis. From the vascular cylinder, the xylem sap is 
transported long distances by bulk flow to the veins that branch 
throughout each leaf.
• The cohesion-tension hypothesis proposes that the move-
ment of xylem sap is driven by a water potential difference 
created at the leaf end of the xylem by the evaporation of water 
from leaf cells. Evaporation lowers the water potential at the air-
water interface, thereby generating the negative pressure that 
pulls water through the xylem.
? Why is the ability of water molecules to form hydrogen bonds 
important for the movement of xylem sap?
CONCEPT 36.4
The rate of transpiration is regulated by stomata  
(pp. 850–853)
• Transpiration is the loss of water vapor from plants. Wilting 
occurs when the water lost by transpiration is not replaced by 
absorption from roots. Plants respond to water deficits by closing 
their stomata. Under prolonged drought conditions, plants can 
become irreversibly injured.
• Stomata are the major pathway for water loss from plants. 
A stoma opens when guard cells bordering the stomatal pore 
take up K+. The opening and closing of stomata are controlled 
by light, CO2, the drought hormone abscisic acid, and a 
circadian rhythm.
• Xerophytes are plants that are adapted to arid environments. 
Reduced leaves and CAM photosynthesis are examples of 
 adaptations to arid environments.
? Why are stomata necessary?
CONCEPT 36.5
Sugars are transported from sources to sinks via the 
phloem (pp. 853–855)
• Mature leaves are the main sugar sources, although  
storage organs can be seasonal sources. Growing organs  
such as roots, stems, and fruits are the main sugar sinks. 
The direction of phloem transport is always from sugar 
source to sugar sink.
• Phloem loading depends on the active transport of sucrose. 
Sucrose is cotransported with H+, which diffuses down a gradient 
generated by proton pumps. Loading of sugar at the source and 
unloading at the sink maintain a pressure difference that keeps 
phloem sap flowing through a sieve tube.
? Why is phloem transport considered an active process?
CONCEPT 36.6
The symplast is highly dynamic (pp. 855–856)
• Plasmodesmata can change in permeability and number. When 
dilated, they provide a passageway for the symplastic transport of 
proteins, RNAs, and other macromolecules over long distances. 
The phloem also conducts nerve-like electrical signals that help 
integrate whole-plant function.
? By what mechanisms is symplastic communication regulated?
Minerals
O2
O2
CO2
CO2
H2O
H2O
 CHAPTER 36  Transport in V ascular Plants 857
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   857 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 859 ===

858 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
9. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Large brown algae called kelps 
can grow as tall as 25 m. Kelps consist of a holdfast anchored 
to the ocean floor, blades that float at the surface and collect 
light, and a long stalk connecting the blades to the holdfast 
(see Figure 28.13). Specialized cells in the stalk, although 
nonvascular, can transport sugar. Suggest a reason why these 
structures analogous to sieve-tube elements might have 
evolved in kelps.
10. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY • INTERPRET THE DATA  
A Minnesota gardener notes that the plants immediately 
bordering a walkway are stunted compared with those 
farther away. Suspecting that the soil near the walkway 
may be contaminated from salt added to the walkway in 
winter, the gardener tests the soil. The composition of the 
soil near the walkway is identical to that farther away except 
that it contains an additional 50 mM NaCl. Assuming that 
the NaCl is completely ionized, calculate how much it 
will lower the solute potential of the soil at 20°C using the 
solute potential equation:
/uni03A8S=-iCRT
where i is the ionization constant (2 for NaCl), C is the 
molar concentration (in mol/L), R is the pressure constant 
3R=0.00831  1L#MPa2>1mol#K24, and T is the temperature in 
Kelvin 1273 + /uni00B0C2.
How would this change in the solute potential of the soil 
affect the water potential of the soil? In what way would the 
change in the water potential of the soil affect the movement 
of water in or out of the roots?
11. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY Cotton plants wilt within a few hours 
of flooding of their roots. The flooding leads to low-oxygen 
conditions, increases in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, and 
decreases in cytosolic pH. Suggest a hypothesis to explain how 
flooding leads to wilting.
12. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: ORGANIZATION Natural 
selection has led to changes in the architecture of plants 
that enable them to photosynthesize more efficiently 
in the ecological niches they occupy. In a short essay 
(100–150 words), explain how shoot architecture enhances 
photosynthesis.
13. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Imagine yourself as a water molecule in the soil solution of a 
forest. In a short essay (100–150 words), explain what pathways 
and what forces would be necessary to carry you to the leaves of 
these trees.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–8 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C36_PRF.indd   858 3/14/20   4:02 AM

=== SIDE 860 ===

859
Figure 37.1 This farmer in India is applying chemical fertilizers to a field of rice. 
Nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P), and potassium (K) are commonly depleted from 
soils to such an extent as to limit crop productivity. That is why they are the major 
ingredients of most chemical fertilizers.
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 37
• Animation: How Plants Obtain Minerals 
from Soil
• Figure 37.11 Walkthrough: The Roles of 
Soil Bacteria in the Nitrogen Nutrition of 
Plants
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Making 
Observations
• Tutorial: Nitrogen Nutrition in Plants
Study Tip
Use mnemonics: Mnemonics are 
memory tools to help remember facts. 
For example, “See Hopkins, California—
Mighty good” (CHOPKNSCaMg) is 
a mnemonic for remembering the 
nine plant macronutrients, as shown 
below. Make your own mnemonics for 
remembering some functions of plant 
macronutrients (see Table 37.1).
See Hopkins, California—Mighty good
See = C = carbon
H = H = hydrogen
o = O = oxygen
37.1 Soil contains a living, complex 
ecosystem p. 860
37.2 Plant roots absorb many types 
of essential elements from the 
soil p. 863
37.3 Plant nutrition often involves 
relationships with other 
organisms p. 866
KEY CONCEPTS
Plant Nutrition37
Nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and other minerals 
are essential for plant growth because of their roles in 
the structure and function of plant cells.
Phosphorus is a 
component of
• DNA and RNA   
   (throughout the cell)
• ATP produced by mitochondria
• phospholipids in cell membranes
Potassium is a cofactor for enzymes 
used throughout the cell; plays a major 
role in maintaining turgor
Nitrogen is a 
component of
• DNA and RNA   
   (throughout the cell)
• proteins
   (throughout the cell)
• chlorophyll
Why do plants need minerals
from the soil?
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   859 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 861 ===

860 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
The A horizon is the topsoil, 
a mixture of broken-down 
rock of various textures, 
living organisms, and 
decaying organic matter.
The C horizon is composed 
mainly of partially broken-
down rock. Some of the rock 
served as “parent” material 
for minerals that later helped 
form the upper horizons.
The B horizon contains much 
less organic matter than the 
A horizon and is less 
weathered.
. Figure 37.2 Soil horizons.
containing about half water and half air, providing a good 
balance between aeration, drainage, and water storage 
capacity. The physical properties of soils can be adjusted 
by adding soil amendments, such as peat moss, compost, 
manure, or sand.
Topsoil Composition
In addition to water and air, topsoil contains inorganic (min-
eral) and organic chemical components. The organic compo-
nents include the many life-forms that inhabit the soil.
Inorganic Components
The surface charges of soil particles determine their ability 
to bind many nutrients. Most of the soil particles in produc-
tive soils are negatively charged and therefore do not bind 
negatively charged ions (anions), such as the plant nutrients 
nitrate 1NO3
-2, phosphate 1H2PO4
-2, and sulfate 1SO4
2-2. As 
a result, these nutrients are easily lost by leaching, percolation 
of water through the soil. Positively charged ions (cations)—
such as potassium 1K+2, calcium 1Ca2+2, and magnesium 
1Mg2+2—adhere to negatively charged soil particles, so are 
less easily lost by leaching.
Roots, however, do not absorb mineral cations directly 
from soil particles; they absorb them from the soil solution. 
Mineral cations enter the soil solution by cation exchange, 
a process in which cations are displaced from soil particles by 
other cations, particularly H+ (Figure 37.3). Therefore, a soil’s 
capacity to exchange cations is determined by the number 
of cation adhesion sites and by the soil’s pH. In general, 
the more clay and organic matter in the soil, the higher the 
Soil contains a living, complex 
ecosystem
The upper layers of the soil, from which plants absorb nearly 
all of the water and minerals they require, contain a wide 
range of living organisms that interact with each other and 
with the physical environment. This complex ecosystem may 
take centuries to form but can be destroyed by human mis-
management in just a few years. To understand why soil must 
be conserved and why particular plants grow where they do, 
we must first consider the basic physical properties of soil: its 
texture and composition.
Soil Texture
The texture of soil depends on the sizes of its particles. Soil 
particles can range from coarse sand (0.02–2 mm in diam-
eter) to silt (0.002–0.02 mm) to microscopic clay particles 
(less than 0.002 mm). These different-sized particles arise 
ultimately from the weathering of rock. Water freezing in 
crevices of rocks causes mechanical fracturing, and weak 
acids in the soil break rocks down chemically. When organ-
isms penetrate the rock, they accelerate breakdown by 
chemical and mechanical means. Roots, for example, secrete 
acids that dissolve the rock, and their growth in fissures 
leads to mechanical fracturing. Mineral particles released 
by weathering become mixed with living organisms and 
humus, the remains of dead organisms and other organic 
matter, forming topsoil. The topsoil and other soil layers are 
called soil horizons (Figure 37.2). The topsoil, or A horizon, 
can range in depth from millimeters to meters. We focus 
mostly on properties of topsoil because it is generally the 
most important soil layer for plant growth.
The topsoils that are the most fertile—supporting the 
most abundant growth—are loams, which are composed of 
roughly equal amounts of sand, silt, and clay. Loamy soils 
have enough small silt and clay particles to provide ample sur-
face area for the adhesion and retention of minerals and water.
Plants are actually nourished by the soil solution, which 
consists of the water and dissolved minerals in the pores 
between soil particles. After a heavy rain, water drains 
from the larger spaces in the soil, but smaller spaces retain 
water because water molecules are attracted to the nega-
tively charged surfaces of clay and other particles. The large 
spaces between soil particles in sandy soils generally don’t 
retain enough water to support vigorous plant growth, 
but they do enable efficient diffusion of oxygen to the 
roots. Soils with large amounts of clay tend to retain too 
much water, and when soil does not drain adequately, the 
air is replaced by water, and the roots suffocate from lack 
of oxygen. Typically, the most fertile topsoils have pores 
CONCEPT 37.1
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   860 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 862 ===

 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 861
Soil Conservation and  
Sustainable Agriculture
Ancient farmers recognized that crop yields on a particular 
plot of land decreased over the years. Moving to uncultivated 
areas, they observed the same pattern of reduced yields over 
time. Eventually, they realized that fertilization, the addi-
tion of mineral nutrients to the soil, could make soil a renew-
able resource that enabled crops to be cultivated season after 
season at a fixed location. This sedentary agriculture facili-
tated a new way of life. Humans began to build permanent 
dwellings—the first villages. They also stored food for use 
between harvests, and food surpluses enabled some people to 
specialize in nonfarming occupations. In short, soil manage-
ment, by fertilization and other practices, helped prepare the 
way for modern societies.
Unfortunately, soil mismanagement has been a recurrent 
problem throughout human history. A dramatic example is 
the American Dust Bowl, an ecological and human disaster 
that ravaged the southwestern Great Plains of the United 
States in the 1930s. This region suffered through devastat-
ing dust storms that resulted from a prolonged drought and 
decades of inappropriate farming techniques. Before farmers 
arrived, the Great Plains had been covered by hardy grasses 
that held the soil in place in spite of recurring droughts and 
torrential rains. But in the late 1800s and early 1900s, many 
settlers planted wheat and raised cattle. These land uses left the 
soil exposed to erosion by winds. A few years of drought made 
the problem worse. During the 1930s, huge quantities of fertile 
soil were blown away in “black blizzards,” rendering millions 
of hectares of farmland useless (Figure 37.4). In one of the 
worst dust storms, clouds of dust blew eastward to Chicago, 
where soil fell like snow, and even reached the Atlantic coast. 
Hundreds of thousands of people in the Dust Bowl region were 
forced to abandon their homes and land, a plight immortal-
ized in John Steinbeck’s novel The Grapes of Wrath.
cation exchange capacity. The clay content is important 
because these small particles have a high ratio of surface area 
to volume, allowing for the ample binding of cations.
Organic Components
The major organic component of topsoil is humus, which 
consists of organic material produced by the decomposition 
of fallen leaves, dead organisms, feces, and other organic 
matter by bacteria and fungi. Humus prevents clay particles 
from packing together and forms a crumbly soil that retains 
water but is still porous enough to aerate roots. Humus also 
increases the soil’s capacity to exchange cations and is a res-
ervoir of mineral nutrients that return gradually to the soil as 
microorganisms decompose the organic matter.
Topsoil is home to an astonishing number and variety of 
organisms. A teaspoon of topsoil has about 5 billion bacteria, 
which cohabit with fungi, algae and other protists, insects, 
earthworms, nematodes, and plant roots. The activities of all 
these organisms affect the soil’s physical and chemical prop-
erties. Earthworms, for example, consume organic matter and 
derive their nutrition from the bacteria and fungi growing on 
this material. They excrete wastes and move large amounts 
of material to the soil surface. In addition, they move organic 
matter into deeper layers. Earthworms mix and clump the 
soil particles, allowing for better gaseous diffusion and water 
retention. Roots also affect soil texture and composition. For 
example, they reduce erosion by binding the soil, and they 
lower soil pH by excreting acids.
     H+ ions in the soil solution neutralize the 
negative charge of soil particles, causing release 
of mineral cations into the soil solution.
Mg2+
K+–
––––– ––
–
K+
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
H2O + CO2 H2CO3 HCO3– + 
Root hair
Soil particle
H+
H+
Cell wall
3
     Roots 
absorb the 
released 
cations.
  Roots acidify 
the soil solution 
by releasing CO2 
from respiration 
and pumping H+ 
into the soil.
 CO2 reacts 
with H2O to 
form H2CO3, 
which releases 
H+ upon 
disassociation.
4
1
2
. Figure 37.3 Cation exchange in soil.
VISUAL SKILLS Which are more likely to be leached from the soil by 
decreasing pH—cations or anions? Explain.
  Mastering Biology Animation: How Plants Obtain Minerals 
from Soil
. Figure 37.4 A massive dust storm in the American Dust 
Bowl during the 1930s.
? Which soil horizon contributed to these dust clouds?
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   861 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 863 ===

862 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
water accumulate in the soil as the water evaporates, making 
the water potential of the soil solution more negative. The 
water potential gradient from soil to roots is reduced, dimin-
ishing water uptake (see Figure 36.12).
Many forms of irrigation, such as the flooding of fields, 
are wasteful because much of the water evaporates. To use 
water efficiently, farmers must understand the water-holding 
capacity of their soil, the water needs of their crops, and the 
appropriate irrigation technology. One popular technology is 
drip irrigation, the slow release of water from perforated plastic 
tubing placed directly at the root zone (Figure 37.5). Because 
drip irrigation requires less water and reduces salinization, it 
is used mainly in arid agricultural regions.
Fertilization
In natural ecosystems, mineral nutrients are usually recycled 
by the excretion of animal wastes and the decomposition 
of humus. Agriculture, however, can interfere with this 
recycling. The lettuce you eat, for example, contains miner-
als extracted from a farmer’s field. As you excrete wastes, 
these minerals are deposited far from their original source. 
Over many harvests, the farmer’s field eventually becomes 
depleted of nutrients. Nutrient depletion is a major cause of 
global soil degradation. Farmers must reverse nutrient deple-
tion by means of fertilization.
Today, most farmers in industrialized nations use fertil-
izers containing minerals that are either mined or prepared 
by energy-intensive processes. These fertilizers are usually 
enriched in nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K)— 
the nutrients most commonly deficient in depleted soils. 
You may have seen fertilizers labeled with a three-number 
code, called the N–P–K ratio. A fertilizer marked “15–10–5,”  
for instance, is 15% N (as ammonium or nitrate), 10% P  
(as phosphate), and 5% K (as the mineral potash).
Manure, fishmeal, and compost are called “organic” fertil-
izers because they contain organic material. Before plants 
can use organic material, however, it must be decomposed 
into the inorganic nutrients that roots can absorb. Whether 
from organic fertilizer or a chemical factory, the minerals a 
plant extracts are in the same form. However, organic fertil-
izers release them gradually, whereas minerals in commercial 
fertilizers are immediately available but may not be retained 
by the soil for long. Minerals not absorbed by roots are often 
leached from the soil by rainwater or irrigation. Mineral run-
off into lakes may lead to explosions in algal populations that 
can deplete oxygen levels and reduce fish populations.
Adjusting Soil pH
Soil pH is an important factor that influences mineral avail-
ability by its effect on cation exchange and the chemical 
form of minerals. Depending on the soil pH, a particular 
mineral may be bound too tightly to clay particles or may be 
in a chemical form that the plant cannot absorb. Most plants 
Soil mismanagement continues to be a major problem to 
this day. More than 30% of the world’s farmland has reduced 
productivity caused by poor soil conditions, such as chemical 
contamination, mineral deficiencies, acidity, salinity, and 
poor drainage. As the world’s population grows, the demand 
for food increases. Because soil quality greatly affects crop 
yield, soil resources must be managed prudently. Today, the 
most productive lands are already being used for agriculture, 
so there are no more frontiers for farmers to clear. Thus, it 
is critical that farmers embrace sustainable agriculture, 
a commitment to farming practices that are conservation 
minded, environmentally safe, and profitable. Sustainable 
agriculture includes the prudent use of irrigation and soil 
amendments, the protection of topsoil from salinization and 
erosion, and the restoration of degraded lands.
Irrigation
Because water shortage often limits plant growth, perhaps 
no technology has increased crop yield as much as irrigation. 
However, irrigation drains freshwater resources. Globally, about 
75% of all freshwater use is devoted to agriculture. Many rivers 
in arid regions have been reduced to trickles by diverting water 
for irrigation. The primary source of irrigation water, however, 
is not surface waters, such as rivers and lakes, but underground 
water reserves called aquifers. In some regions, the rate of water 
removal is exceeding the natural refilling of the aquifers, mak-
ing this practice unsustainable. A further consequence of aquifer 
depletion is land subsidence, a gradual settling or sudden sinking 
of the ground surface directly above the aquifer. Land subsidence  
can destroy property and negatively impact agriculture.
Irrigation, particularly from groundwater, can also lead to 
soil salinization—the addition of salts to the soil that make it 
too salty for cultivating plants. Salts dissolved in irrigation 
. Figure 37.5 Drip irrigation. These young banana plants in 
Israel benefit from the slow release of water to the root zone.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   862 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 864 ===

 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 863
example, alpine pennycress (Thlaspi caerulescens) can accu-
mulate zinc in its shoots at concentrations 300 times higher 
than most plants can tolerate. The shoots can be harvested 
and the zinc removed. Such plants show promise for cleaning 
up areas contaminated by smelters, mines, or nuclear tests. 
Phytoremediation is a type of bioremediation, which also 
uses prokaryotes and protists to detoxify polluted sites (see 
Concepts 27.6 and 55.5).
We have examined the importance of soil conservation for 
sustainable agriculture. Mineral nutrients contribute greatly to 
soil fertility, but which minerals are most important, and why 
do plants need them? These are the topics of the next section.
prefer slightly acidic soil because the high H+ concentrations 
can displace positively charged minerals from soil particles, 
making them more available for absorption. Adjusting soil pH 
is tricky because a change in H+ concentration may make one 
mineral more available but another less available. At pH 8,  
for instance, plants can absorb calcium, but iron is almost 
unavailable. The soil pH should be matched to a crop’s min-
eral needs. If the soil is too alkaline, adding sulfate will lower 
the pH. Soil that is too acidic can be adjusted by adding lime 
(calcium carbonate or calcium hydroxide).
When the soil pH dips to 5 or lower, toxic aluminum 
ions 1Al3+2 become more soluble and are absorbed by roots, 
stunting root growth and preventing the uptake of calcium, 
a needed plant nutrient. Low soil pH and Al3+ toxicity are 
especially serious problems in tropical regions, where the 
pressure of producing food for a growing population is often 
most acute. Some plants can cope with high Al3+ levels by 
secreting organic anions that bind Al3+ and render it harm-
less. Scientists have altered tobacco and papaya plants by 
introducing a citrate synthase gene from a bacterium into the 
plants’ genomes. The resulting overproduction of citric acid 
increased aluminum resistance.
Controlling Erosion
As happened most dramatically in the Dust Bowl, water and 
wind erosion can remove large amounts of topsoil. Erosion 
is a major cause of soil degradation because nutrients are car-
ried away by wind and streams. To limit erosion, farmers can 
plant rows of trees as windbreaks, terrace hillside crops, and 
cultivate crops in a contour pattern (Figure 37.6). Crops such 
as alfalfa and wheat provide good ground cover and protect 
the soil better than maize and other crops that are usually 
planted in more widely spaced rows.
Erosion can also be reduced by a plowing technique called 
no-till agriculture. In traditional plowing, the entire field 
is tilled, or turned over. This practice helps control weeds but 
disrupts the meshwork of roots that holds the soil in place, 
leading to increased surface runoff and erosion. In no-till agri-
culture, a special plow creates narrow furrows for seeds and 
fertilizer. In this way, the field is seeded with minimal distur-
bance to the soil, while also using less fertilizer.
Phytoremediation
Some land areas are unfit for cultivation because toxic met-
als or organic pollutants have contaminated the soil or 
groundwater. Traditionally, soil remediation, the detoxifica-
tion of contaminated soils, has focused on nonbiological 
technologies, such as removing and storing contaminated 
soil in landfills, but these techniques are costly and often 
disrupt the landscape. Phytoremediation is a nondestruc-
tive biotechnology that harnesses the ability of some plants 
to extract soil pollutants and concentrate them in portions 
of the plant that can be easily removed for safe disposal. For 
. Figure 37.6 Contour tillage. These crops are planted in rows 
that go around, rather than up and down, the hills. Contour tillage 
helps slow water runoff and topsoil erosion after heavy rains.
CONCEPT 37.2
Plant roots absorb many types of 
essential elements from the soil
Water, air, and soil minerals all contribute to plant growth. 
A plant’s water content can be measured by comparing the 
mass before and after drying. Typically, 80–90% of a plant’s 
fresh mass is water. About 96% of the remaining dry mass 
consists of carbohydrates such as cellulose and starch that 
are produced by photosynthesis. Thus, the components of 
carbohydrates—carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen—are the 
most abundant elements in dried plant residue. Inorganic 
substances from the soil, although essential for plant survival, 
account for only about 4% of a plant’s dry mass.
CONCEPT CHECK 37.1
1. What problems might be associated with a soil that is com-
posed of 85% coarse sand, 10% silt, and 5% clay?
2. Some lawn mowers collect clippings. What is a drawback of 
this practice with respect to plant nutrition?
3. WHAT IF? How would the absence of vegetation affect min-
eral runoff from chemical fertilizers into water bodies? Explain.
4. MAKE CONNECTIONS Note three ways the properties of 
water contribute to soil formation. See Concept 3.2.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   863 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 865 ===

864 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
molybdenum. Sodium is a ninth essential micronutrient for 
plants that use the C4 or CAM pathways of photosynthesis 
(see Concept 11.5) because it is needed for the regeneration 
of phosphoenolpyruvate, the CO2 acceptor used in these two 
types of carbon fixation.
Micronutrients function in plants mainly as enzyme 
cofactors (see Concept 6.4). Iron, for example, is a metal-
lic component of cytochromes, the proteins in the electron 
transport chains of chloroplasts and mitochondria. It is 
because micronutrients generally just aid enzymes that plants 
need only tiny quantities. The requirement for molybdenum, 
for instance, is so modest that there is only one atom of this 
rare element for every 60 million atoms of hydrogen in dried 
plant material. Yet a deficiency of molybdenum or any other 
micronutrient can weaken or kill a plant.
Many animals, including humans, get much of their 
essential mineral nutrients from plants. Low dietary 
concentrations of essential micronutrients, such as iron (Fe),  
iodine (I), and zinc (Zn), contribute to the problem 
of micronutrient malnutrition (“hidden hunger”). Human 
malnourishment, as opposed to undernourishment, results 
when people receive enough calories from their ingestion 
of carbohydrates but lack other dietary factors (such as essential 
minerals, vitamins, or amino acids) required for good health.
Symptoms of Mineral Deficiency
The symptoms of a deficiency depend partly on the mineral’s 
function as a nutrient. For example, a deficiency of magne-
sium, a component of chlorophyll, causes chlorosis, yellowing 
of leaves. In some cases, the relationship between a deficiency 
and its symptoms is less direct. For instance, iron deficiency 
can cause chlorosis even though chlorophyll contains no iron 
because iron ions are required as a cofactor in an enzymatic 
step of chlorophyll synthesis.
Mineral deficiency symptoms depend not only on the role 
of the nutrient but also on its mobility within the plant. If a 
nutrient moves about freely, symptoms appear first in older 
organs because young, growing tissues are a greater sink for 
nutrients in short supply. For example, a plant deficient in 
magnesium, a relatively mobile ion, first shows signs of chlo-
rosis in its older leaves. In contrast, a deficiency of a relatively 
immobile mineral, such as iron, affects young parts of the 
plant first. The older tissues have adequate amounts of iron 
that they retain during periods of short supply. The mineral 
requirements of a plant also change with the age of the plant. 
Young seedlings, for example, rarely show mineral deficiency 
symptoms because their mineral needs are met largely by the 
mineral reserves stored in the seeds themselves.
The symptoms of a mineral deficiency may vary between 
species but in a given plant are often distinctive enough to 
aid in diagnosis. Deficiencies of phosphorus, potassium, and 
nitrogen are most common, as in the example of maize leaves 
in Figure 37.8.
Application In hydroponic culture, plants are grown 
in mineral solutions without soil. One use of hydroponic 
culture is to identify essential elements in plants.
Technique Plant roots are bathed in aerated solutions of 
known mineral composition. Aerating the water provides the 
roots with oxygen for cellular respiration. (Note: The flasks 
would normally be opaque to prevent algal growth.) A mineral, 
such as iron, can be omitted to test whether it is essential.
Experimental: Solution
without iron
Control: Solution
containing all minerals
Results If the omitted mineral is essential, mineral deficiency 
symptoms occur, such as stunted growth and discolored leaves. 
By definition, the plant would not be able to complete its life 
cycle. Deficiencies of different elements may have different symp-
toms, which can aid in diagnosing mineral deficiencies in soil.
Hydroponic Culture
. Figure 37.7 Research Method
Essential Elements
The inorganic substances in plants contain more than 50 
chemical elements. In studying the chemical composition 
of plants, we must distinguish elements that are essential 
from those that are merely present in the plant. A chemical 
element is considered an essential element only if it is 
required for a plant to complete its life cycle and reproduce.
To determine which chemical elements are essential, 
researchers use hydroponic culture, in which plants are 
grown in mineral solutions instead of soil (Figure 37.7). Such 
studies have helped identify 17 essential elements needed by 
all plants (Table 37.1). Hydroponic culture is also used on a 
small scale to grow some greenhouse crops.
Nine of the essential elements are called macronutrients 
because plants require them in relatively large amounts. Six of 
these are the major components of organic compounds forming 
a plant’s structure: carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, phos-
phorus, and sulfur. The other three macronutrients are potas-
sium, calcium, and magnesium. Of all the mineral nutrients, 
nitrogen contributes the most to plant growth and crop yields. 
Plants require nitrogen as a component of proteins, nucleic 
acids, chlorophyll, and other important organic molecules.
The other essential elements are called micronutrients 
because plants need them in only tiny quantities. They are 
chlorine, iron, manganese, boron, zinc, copper, nickel, and 
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   864 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 866 ===

Table 37.1 Essential Elements in Plants
Element
(Form Primarily 
Absorbed by Plants)
% Mass in 
Dry Tissue Major Function(s) Early Visual Symptom(s) of Nutrient Deficiencies
Macronutrients
Carbon 1CO22 45% Major component of organic compounds Poor growth
Oxygen 1CO22 45% Major component of organic compounds Poor growth
Hydrogen 1H2O2 6% Major component of organic compounds Wilting, poor growth
Nitrogen 1NO3
-, NH4
+2 1.5% Component of nucleic acids, proteins, and 
chlorophyll
Chlorosis at tips of older leaves (common in heavily 
cultivated soils or soils low in organic material)
Potassium 1K+2 1.0% Enzyme cofactor; major solute functioning in 
water balance; operation of stomata
Mottling of older leaves, drying of leaf edges; weak 
stems; roots poorly developed (common in acidic or 
sandy soils)
Calcium 1Ca2+2 0.5% Important component of middle lamella and 
cell walls; maintains membrane function; 
signal transduction
Crinkling of young leaves; death of terminal buds 
(common in acidic or sandy soils)
Magnesium 1Mg2+2 0.2% Component of chlorophyll; cofactor of many 
enzymes
Chlorosis between veins, found in older leaves (com-
mon in acidic or sandy soils)
Phosphorus 
1H2PO4
-, HPO4
2-2
0.2% Component of nucleic acids, phospholipids, 
ATP
Healthy appearance but very slow development; thin 
stems; purpling of veins; poor flowering and fruiting 
(common in acidic, wet, or cold soils)
Sulfur 1SO4
2-2 0.1% Component of proteins General chlorosis in young leaves (common in sandy 
or very wet soils)
Micronutrients
Chlorine 1Cl-2 0.01% Photosynthesis (water-splitting); functions in 
water balance
Wilting; stubby roots; leaf mottling (uncommon)
Iron 1Fe3+, Fe2+2 0.01% Respiration; photosynthesis: chlorophyll syn-
thesis; N2 fixation
Chlorosis between veins, found in young leaves 
(common in basic soils)
Manganese 1Mn2+2 0.005% Active in formation of amino acids;
activates some enzymes; required for water-
splitting step of photosynthesis
Chlorosis between veins, found in young leaves 
(common in basic soils rich in humus)
Boron 1H2BO3
-2 0.002% Cofactor in chlorophyll synthesis; role in cell 
wall function; pollen tube growth
Death of meristems; thick, leathery, and discolored 
leaves (occurs in any soil; most common micronutri-
ent deficiency)
Zinc 1Zn2+2 0.002% Active in formation of chlorophyll;
cofactor of some enzymes; needed for DNA 
transcription
Reduced internode length; crinkled leaves (common 
in some geographic regions)
Copper 1Cu+, Cu2+2 0.001% Component of many redox and lignin-
biosynthetic enzymes
Light green color throughout young leaves, with 
drying of leaf tips; roots stunted and excessively 
branched (common in some geographic regions)
Nickel 1Ni2+2 0.001% Nitrogen metabolism General chlorosis in all leaves; death of leaf tips 
(common in acidic or sandy soils)
Molybdenum 
1MoO4
2-2
0.0001% Nitrogen metabolism Death of root and shoot tips; chlorosis in older leaves 
(common in acidic soils in some geographic areas)
MAKE CONNECTIONS Explain why CO2, rather than O2, is the 
source of much of the dry mass oxygen in plants. See Concept 11.1.
  Mastering Biology  
Interview with Gloria Coruzzi:  
Assimilating more nitrogen into plants
c Figure 37.8 The most common mineral deficiencies, as seen 
in maize leaves. Mineral deficiency symptoms may vary in different 
species. In maize, nitrogen deficiency is evident in a yellowing that 
starts at the tip and moves along the center (midrib) of older leaves. 
Phosphorus-deficient maize plants have reddish purple margins, 
particularly in young leaves. Potassium-deficient maize plants exhibit 
“firing,” or drying, along tips and margins of older leaves.
Healthy
2oVCUUiWOdGƂEiGnV
Phosphorus-
dGƂEiGnV
0iVTogGn
dGƂEiGnV
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   865 3/14/20   4:04 AM

=== SIDE 867 ===

866 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can diagnose a mineral 
deficiency in leaves of an orange tree. Micronutrient short-
ages are less common than macronutrient shortages and tend 
to occur in certain geographic regions because of differences 
in soil composition. One way to confirm a diagnosis is to 
analyze the mineral content of the plant or soil. The amount 
of a micronutrient needed to correct a deficiency is usually 
small. For example, a zinc deficiency in fruit trees can usually 
be cured by hammering a few zinc nails into each tree trunk. 
Moderation is important because overdoses of a micronutri-
ent or macronutrient can be detrimental or toxic. Too much 
nitrogen, for example, can lead to excessive vine growth in 
tomato plants at the expense of good fruit production.
Global Climate Change and Food Quality
Since plant growth is generally enhanced by increases in 
atmospheric CO2 and by warming temperatures, global 
food production, as measured by plant biomass, is expected 
to increase in response to global climate change in cer-
tain parts of the world. But food production must also be 
judged by its quality. Unfortunately, there are indications 
that plants today, compared with plants in preindustrial 
times, are not taking up nutrients sufficiently to keep pace 
with their increased fixation of CO2 into carbohydrates. For 
example, a study of 43 crops found significant declines in 
protein, Ca, P, Fe, riboflavin, and ascorbic acid from 1950 
to 1999. Although this decline in food quality might be 
caused by a shift toward higher-yielding crops, studies of 
wild plants suggest that global climate change is the cul-
prit. For example, a study revealed that the protein content 
of goldenrod (Solidago canadensis) pollen has declined by 
one third since the Industrial Revolution, and the change 
closely correlates with the rise in CO2 that has occurred. 
Declines in the qualities of pollen as a food source might 
play a role in the widespread decline of honeybees, impor-
tant pollinators whose decreasing population threatens 
crop production.
CONCEPT CHECK 37.2
1. Are some essential elements more important than others? 
Explain.
2. WHAT IF? If an element increases the growth rate of a 
plant, can it be defined as an essential element?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS Based on Figure 10.17, explain why 
hydroponically grown plants would grow much more slowly 
if they were not sufficiently aerated.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
Plant nutrition often involves 
relationships with other organisms
To this point, we have looked at plants as exploiters of 
soil resources, but plants and soil have a two-way relation-
ship. Dead plants provide much of the energy needed by 
soil-dwelling bacteria and fungi. Many of these organisms 
also benefit from sugar-rich secretions produced by living 
roots. Meanwhile, plants derive benefits from their associa-
tions with soil bacteria and fungi. As shown in Figure 37.9, 
mutually beneficial relationships across kingdoms and 
domains are not rare in nature. However, they are of par-
ticular importance to plants. We’ll explore some important 
mutualisms between plants and soil bacteria and fungi, 
as well as some unusual, nonmutualistic forms of plant 
nutrition.
CONCEPT 37.3
Scientific Skills Exercise
Making Observations
What Mineral Deficiency Is This Plant Exhibiting? Plant 
growers often diagnose deficiencies in their crops by examin-
ing changes to the foliage, such as chlorosis (yellowing), death 
of some leaves, discoloring, mottling, scorching, or changes in 
size or texture. In this exercise, you will diagnose a mineral defi-
ciency by observing a plant’s leaves and applying what you have 
learned about symptoms from the text and Table 37.1.
Data The data for this exercise come from the photograph 
below of leaves on an orange tree exhibiting a mineral deficiency.
INTERPRET THE DATA 
1. How do the young leaves differ in appearance from the older 
leaves?
2. What change do you observe in the leaves, and where in the 
leaves does it appear? List the three nutrients whose deficien-
cies give rise to this symptom. Based on the symptom’s location, 
which one of these three nutrients can be ruled out, and why? 
What does the location suggest about the other two nutrients?
3. How would your hypothesis about the cause of this deficiency 
be influenced if tests showed that the soil was low in humus?
 Instructors: A version of this Scientific Skills Exercise can be 
assigned in Mastering Biology.
Older leaf
Young leaf
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   866 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 868 ===

Some toxic species of fish don’t make their own poison. How is 
that possible? Some species of ants chew leaves but don’t eat them. 
Why? The answers lie in some amazing mutualisms, relationships 
between different species in which each species provides a substance 
or service that benefits the other (see Concept 54.1). Sometimes 
mutualisms occur within the same kingdom, such as between two 
species of animals. Many mutualisms, however, involve species from 
different kingdoms or domains, as in these examples.
Puffer fish (fugu)
A longitudinal section of the 
lichen Peltigera showing green 
photosynthetic bacteria sand-  
wiched between layers of fungus
Leaf-cutter
ant bringing
a cut leaf  
to a nest
Ants tending a fungal garden in a nest 
The floating fern Azolla
A lichen is a mutualistic association between a fungus and a photo- 
synthetic partner. In the lichen Peltigera, the photosynthetic partner 
is a species of cyanobacterium. The cyanobacterium supplies carbo- 
hydrates, while the fungus 
provides anchorage, protection,
minerals, and  water.  (See 
Figure 31.25.)
Fugu is the Japanese name for puffer fish and the 
delicacy made from it, which can be deadly. 
Most species of puffer fish contain lethal 
amounts of the nerve toxin tetrodotoxin 
in their organs, especially the liver, 
ovaries, and intestines. Therefore, a 
specially trained chef must remove 
the poisonous parts.  The tetrodotoxin 
is synthesized by mutualistic bacteria 
(various Vibrio species) associated with 
the fish. The fish gains a potent chemical 
defense, while the bacteria live in a high- 
nutrient, low-competition environment.
Leaf-cutter ants harvest leaves that they carry 
back to their nest, but the ants do not eat the 
leaves. Instead, a fungus grows by absorbing 
nutrients from the leaves, 
and the ants eat part of the 
fungus that they have cultivated. 
The lichen Peltigera
Protective ant 
harvesting 
nectar
Some species of plants are aggressively 
defended from predators and competitors by 
ants.  The plant provides nourishment for the 
ants in the form of  carbohydrate-rich nectar  
from glands called 
nectaries. (See Figure 54.9  
for another example of a 
mutualism between a 
plant and ants.)
The floating fern Azolla provides carbohy-
drates for a nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium 
that resides in the air spaces of the leaves. 
In return, the fern receives nitrogen from 
the cyanobacterium. (See Concept 27.5.)
Fungus–Bacterium
Animal–Fungus
Plant–Fungus
Animal–Bacterium
Plant–Bacterium
Plant–Animal
Most plant species have mycorrhi-
zae, mutualistic associations 
between roots and fungi. The 
fungus absorbs carbohydrates from 
the roots. In return, the fungus’s 
mycelium, a dense network of 
filaments called hyphae, increases 
the surface area for the uptake of 
water and minerals by the roots. 
(See Figure 31.4.)
A fungus growing on the root 
of a sorghum plant (SEM)
Mutualism Across Kingdoms and Domains
/uni25BC Figure 37.9
MAKE CONNECTIONS 
Describe three more examples of mutualisms. (See Figure 27.20, 
Figure 38.4, and Concept 42.4.)
MAKE CONNECTIONS
 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 867
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   867 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 869 ===

868 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
produce antibiotics that protect roots from disease. Others 
absorb toxic metals or make nutrients more available to roots. 
Still others convert gaseous nitrogen into forms usable by 
the plant or produce chemicals that stimulate plant growth. 
Inoculation of seeds with plant-growth-promoting rhizobac-
teria can increase crop yield and reduce the need for fertilizers 
and pesticides.
Some rhizobacteria are free-living in the rhizosphere, 
whereas others are endophytes that live between cells 
within the plant. Both the intercellular spaces occupied by 
endophytic bacteria and the rhizosphere associated with each 
plant root system contain a unique and complex cocktail of 
root secretions and microbial products that differ from those 
of the surrounding soil. A recent study revealed that the com-
positions of bacterial communities living endophytically and 
in the rhizosphere are not identical (Figure 37.10). A better 
Bacteria and Plant Nutrition
A variety of soil bacteria play roles in plant nutrition. Some 
engage in mutually beneficial chemical exchanges with plant 
roots. Others enhance the decomposition of organic materi-
als and increase nutrient availability.
Rhizobacteria
Rhizobacteria are bacteria that live either in close associa-
tion with plant roots or in the rhizosphere, the soil closely 
surrounding plant roots. Many rhizobacteria form mutually 
beneficial associations with plant roots. Rhizobacteria depend 
on nutrients such as sugars, amino acids, and organic acids 
that are secreted by plant cells. Up to 20% of a plant’s pho-
tosynthetic production may be used to fuel these complex 
bacterial communities. In return, plants reap many benefits 
from these mutualistic associations. Some rhizobacteria 
/uni25BC Figure 37.10 Inquiry
The two explanatory labels give examples of how to interpret 
the diagram.
Conclusion The “species” composition of the bacterial 
communities varied markedly according to the location inside 
the root versus outside the root and according to soil type.
INTERPRET THE DATA (a) Which of the three community locations 
was least like the other two? (b) Rank the three variables (community 
location, developmental stage of roots, and soil type) in terms of 
how strongly they affect the “species” composition of the bacterial 
communities.
How variable are the compositions of bacterial communities inside and outside of roots?
Experiment The bacterial 
communities found within 
and immediately outside of 
root systems are known to 
improve plant growth. In 
order to devise agricultural 
strategies to increase the 
benefits of these bacterial 
communities, it is necessary to 
determine how complex they 
are and what factors affect 
their composition. A problem 
with studying these bacterial 
communities is that a hand-
ful of soil contains as many 
as 10,000 types of bacteria, 
more than all the bacterial 
species that have been described. Researchers cannot simply 
culture each species and use a taxonomic key to identify them; a 
molecular approach is needed.
Jeffery Dangl and his colleagues estimated the number 
of bacterial “species” in samples using a technique called 
metagenomics (see Concept 20.1). The bacterial community 
samples differed in location (endophytic, inside the rhizo-
sphere, or outside the rhizosphere), soil type (having large 
amounts of clay or porous), and the developmental stage of the 
root system with which they were associated (old or young). 
The DNA from each sample was purified, and the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify the DNA that codes 
for the 16S ribosomal RNA subunits. Many thousands of DNA 
sequence variations were found in each sample. The researchers 
lumped the sequences that were more than 97% identical into 
“taxonomic units” or “species.” (The word species is in quota-
tion marks because “two organisms having a single gene that is 
more than 97% identical” is not explicit in any definition of spe-
cies.) Having established the types of “species” in each commu-
nity, the researchers made a tree diagram showing the percent 
of bacterial “species” found in common in each community.
Results This tree diagram breaks down the relatedness of 
bacterial communities into finer and finer levels of detail. 
. Bacteria (green) on surface of root 
(fluorescent LM) Bacteria inside 
roots (endophytes)
in clayey soil
Bacteria inside
roots (endophytes)
in porous soil
Soil bacteria 
outside rhizosphere 
in clayey soil
Soil bacteria 
inside rhizosphere
in clayey soil
Soil bacteria 
inside rhizosphere
in porous soil
Soil bacteria 
outside rhizosphere 
in porous soil
0 20 40 60 80
Older roots
Younger roots
Percent similarity of the “species”
composition of communities
These two groups 
(bacteria inside 
roots in clayey 
soil and bacteria 
inside roots in 
porous soil) are 
34% similar.
These two groups (soil 
bacteria inside younger 
and inside older roots 
outside the rhizosphere 
in porous soil) are 80% 
similar.
Data from D. S. Lundberg et al., Defining the core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbi-
ome, Nature 488:86–94 (2012).
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   868 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 870 ===

 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 869
lost, particularly in anaerobic soils, when denitrifying bacte-
ria convert NO3
- to N2, which diffuses into the atmosphere.
In addition to NO3
-, plants can acquire nitrogen in 
the form of NH4
+ (ammonium) through two processes, as 
shown on the left in Figure 37.11. In one process, nitrogen-
fixing bacteria convert gaseous nitrogen 1N22 to NH3, which 
then picks up another H+ in the soil solution, forming NH4
+.  
In the other process, called ammonification, decomposers 
convert the organic nitrogen from dead organic material 
into NH4
+.
Bacteria and Nitrogen Fixation
Although Earth’s atmosphere is 79% nitrogen, plants cannot 
use free gaseous nitrogen 1N22 because there is a triple bond 
between the two nitrogen atoms, making the molecule 
almost inert. For atmospheric N2 to be of use to plants, it 
must be reduced to NH3 by a process known as nitrogen 
fixation. All nitrogen-fixing organisms are bacteria. Some 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria are free-living in the soil (see 
Figure 37.11), whereas others live in the rhizosphere. Among 
this latter group, members of the genus Rhizobium form effi-
cient and intimate associations with the roots of legumes 
(such as beans, alfalfa, and peanuts), altering the structure of 
the hosts’ roots markedly, as will be discussed shortly.
The multistep conversion of N2 to NH3 by nitrogen 
fixation can be summarized as follows:
N2  1  8e –  1  8 H+ 1 16 ATP          2 NH3  1  H2  1  16 ADP  1 16Pi
understanding of the types of bacteria within and around 
roots could potentially have profound agricultural benefits.
Bacteria in the Nitrogen Cycle
Because nitrogen is required in large amounts for synthe-
sizing proteins and nucleic acids, no mineral deficiency is 
more limiting to plant growth than a lack of nitrogen. The 
forms of nitrogen that plants can use include NO3
- and 
NH4
+. Some soil nitrogen derives from the weathering of 
rocks, and lightning produces small amounts of NO3
- that 
get carried to the soil in rain. However, most of the nitro-
gen available to plants comes from the activity of bacteria 
(Figure 37.11). This activity is part of the nitrogen cycle, 
a series of natural processes by which certain nitrogen-
containing substances from the air and soil are made avail-
able to living things, are used by them, and are returned to 
the air and soil (see Figure 55.14).
Plants commonly acquire nitrogen in the form of NO3
- 
(nitrate). Soil NO3
- is largely formed by a two-step process 
called nitrification, which consists of the oxidation of ammo-
nia 1NH32 to nitrite 1NO2
-2, followed by oxidation of NO2
- 
to NO3
-. Different types of nitrifying bacteria mediate each 
step, as shown at the bottom of Figure 37.11. After the roots 
absorb NO3
-, a plant enzyme reduces it back to NH4
+, which 
other enzymes incorporate into amino acids and other 
organic compounds. Most plant species transport nitrogen 
from roots to shoots via the xylem as NO3
- or as organic 
compounds synthesized in the roots. Some soil nitrogen is 
NH4
+
(ammonium)  
H+
(from soil) 
NH3
(ammonia)
NH4
+
  
NO3
–
(nitrate)  
NO2
–
(nitrite)  Nitrifying
bacteria
Nitrifying
bacteria
Denitrifying
bacteria
Weathering of rock
Nitrate and
nitrogenous
organic
compounds
exported in 
xylem to 
shoot system
Root
Nitrogen-fixing
bacteria
SOIL
SOIL
ATMOSPHERE
Ammonifying
bacteria
Microbial
decomposition
Amino
acids
Proteins from humus
(dead organic material)
N2 N2 
N2 
ATMOSPHERE
. Figure 37.11 The roles of soil bacteria in the nitrogen nutrition of plants. Ammonium (NH4
+) is 
made available to plants by two types of soil bacteria: those that fix atmospheric N2 (nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria) and those that decompose organic material (ammonifying bacteria). Although plants absorb 
some ammonium from the soil, they absorb mainly nitrate, which is produced from ammonium by nitrifying 
bacteria. Plants reduce nitrate back to ammonium before incorporating the nitrogen into organic compounds.
VISUAL SKILLS I f  a n  a n i m a l  d i e d  n e a r  a  r o o t ,  w o u l d  t h e  p l a n t  h a v e  g r e a t e r  a c c e s s  t o  a m m o n i u m ,  n i t r a t e ,  o r  b o t h ?
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   869 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 871 ===

870 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
The reaction is driven by the enzyme complex nitrogenase. 
Because the process of nitrogen fixation requires 16 ATP mol-
ecules for every 2 NH3 molecules synthesized, nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria require a rich supply of carbohydrates from decaying 
material, root secretions, or (in the case of the Rhizobium bac-
teria) the vascular tissue of roots.
The mutualism between Rhizobium (“root-living”) bacteria 
and legume roots involves dramatic changes in root structure. 
Along a legume’s roots are swellings called nodules, composed 
of plant cells “infected” by Rhizobium bacteria (Figure 37.12). 
Nodules
Roots
c Figure 37.12 Root nodules 
on a legume. The spherical 
structures along this soybean 
root system are nodules 
containing Rhizobium bacteria. 
The bacteria fix nitrogen and 
obtain photosynthetic products 
supplied by the plant.
?  How is the relationship 
between legume plants 
and Rhizobium bacteria 
mutualistic?
Inside each nodule, Rhizobium bacteria assume a form called 
bacteroids, which are contained within vesicles formed in 
the root cells. Legume-Rhizobium relationships generate more 
usable nitrogen for plants than all industrial fertilizers used 
today—and at virtually no cost to the farmer.
Nitrogen fixation by Rhizobium requires an anaerobic 
environment, a condition facilitated by the location of 
the bacteroids inside living cells in the root cortex. The 
woody external layers of root nodules also help to limit gas 
exchange. Some root nodules appear reddish because of a 
molecule called leghemoglobin (leg- for “legume”), an iron-
containing protein that binds reversibly to oxygen (similar 
to the hemoglobin in human red blood cells). This protein 
is an oxygen “buffer,” reducing the concentration of free 
oxygen and thereby providing an anaerobic environment 
for nitrogen fixation while regulating the oxygen supply for 
the intense cellular respiration required to produce ATP for 
nitrogen fixation.
Each legume species is associated with a strain of 
Rhizobium bacteria. Figure 37.13 describes how a root nodule 
develops after bacteria enter through an “infection thread” 
in a root hair. The symbiotic relationship between a legume 
and nitrogen-fixing bacteria is mutualistic. The bacteria 
supply the host plant with fixed nitrogen while the plant 
Infected
root hair
Dividing cells
in root cortex
Bacteroid
Bacteroids
Sclerenchyma cells   
Dividing cells in pericycle
Nodule
vascular
tissue
Bacteroid
Infection
thread
Rhizobium
bacteria
Developing root nodule
Root hair
sloughed off
Bacteroid
Roots emit chemical signals that
attract Rhizobium bacteria. The
bacteria then emit signals that
stimulate root hairs to elongate
and to form an infection thread
by an invagination of the
plasma membrane.
1
45
2
     Growth continues in
the affected regions of
the cortex and pericycle,
and these two masses
of dividing cells fuse,
forming the nodule.
3
     The infection thread containing the 
bacteria penetrates the root cortex. 
Cells of the cortex and pericycle begin 
dividing, and vesicles containing the 
bacteria bud into cortical cells from the 
branching infection thread. Bacteria 
within the vesicles develop into 
nitrogen-fixing bacteroids.
     The nodule develops vascular tissue 
(individual cells not shown) that 
supplies nutrients to the nodule and 
carries nitrogenous compounds into 
the vascular cylinder for distribution
throughout the plant.
Nodule
vascular
tissue
     The mature nodule grows to be many 
times the diameter of the root. A layer of 
lignin-rich sclerenchyma cells forms, 
reducing absorption of oxygen and 
thereby helping maintain the anaerobic 
environment needed for nitrogen fixation.
. Figure 37.13 Development of a soybean root nodule.
VISUAL SKILLS W h a t  p l a n t  t i s s u e  s y s t e m s  a r e  m o d i f i e d  b y  r o o t  n o d u l e  f o r m a t i o n ?
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   870 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 872 ===

 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 871
Mycorrhizae and Plant Evolution
EVOLUTION Mycorrhizae are not oddities; they are formed 
by most plant species. In fact, this plant-fungus mutualism 
might have been one of the evolutionary adaptations that 
helped plants initially colonize land (see Concept 29.1). 
When the earliest plants, which evolved from green algae, 
began to invade the land 400 to 500 million years ago, they 
encountered a harsh environment. Although the soil con-
tained mineral nutrients, it lacked organic matter. Therefore, 
rain probably quickly leached away many of the soluble 
mineral nutrients. The barren land, however, was also a place 
of opportunities because light and carbon dioxide were abun-
dant, and there was little competition or herbivory.
Neither the early land plants nor early land fungi were 
fully equipped to exploit the terrestrial environment. The 
early plants lacked the ability to extract essential nutrients 
from the soil, while the fungi were unable to manufacture 
carbohydrates. Instead of the fungi becoming parasitic on 
the rhizoids of the evolving plants (roots or root hairs had 
not yet evolved), the two organisms formed mycorrhizal 
associations, a mutualistic symbiosis that allowed both of 
them to exploit the terrestrial environment. Fossil evidence 
supports the idea that mycorrhizal associations occurred in 
the earliest land plants. The small minority of extant angio-
sperms that are nonmycorrhizal probably lost this ability 
through gene loss.
Types of Mycorrhizae
Mycorrhizae come in two forms called ectomycorrhizae and 
arbuscular mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae form a dense 
sheath, or mantle, of mycelia (mass of branching hyphae) 
over the surface of the root. Fungal hyphae extend from the 
mantle into the soil, greatly increasing the surface area for 
water and mineral absorption. Hyphae also grow into the 
root cortex. These hyphae do not penetrate the root cells 
but form a network in the apoplast, or extracellular space, 
which facilitates nutrient exchange between the fungus and 
the plant. Compared with “uninfected” roots, the roots of 
ectomycorrhizae are generally thicker, shorter, and more 
branched. They typically do not form root hairs, which would 
be superfluous given the extensive surface area of the fungal 
mycelium. Only about 10% of plant families have species 
that form ectomycorrhizae. The vast majority of these species 
are woody, including members of the pine, oak, birch, and 
 eucalyptus families.
Unlike ectomycorrhizae, arbuscular mycorrhizae 
(also called endomycorrhizae) do not ensheath the root but 
are embedded within it. They start when microscopic soil 
hyphae respond to the presence of a root by growing toward 
it, establishing contact, and growing along its surface. The 
hyphae penetrate between epidermal cells and then enter the 
root cortex, where they digest small patches of the cell walls 
provides the bacteria with carbohydrates and other organic 
compounds. The root nodules use most of the ammonium 
produced to make amino acids, which are then transported 
up to the shoot through the xylem.
How does a legume species recognize a certain strain 
of Rhizobium? And how does an encounter with that spe-
cific Rhizobium strain lead to development of a nodule? 
Each partner responds to chemical signals from the other 
by expressing certain genes whose products contribute 
to nodule formation. By understanding the formation 
of root nodules, researchers hope to learn how to induce 
Rhizobium uptake and nodule formation in crop plants that 
do not normally form such nitrogen-fixing mutualistic 
relationships.
Nitrogen Fixation and Agriculture
The benefits of nitrogen fixation underlie most types of crop 
rotation. In this practice, a nonlegume such as maize is 
planted one year, and the following year alfalfa or some other 
legume is planted to restore the concentration of fixed nitro-
gen in the soil. To ensure that the legume encounters its spe-
cific Rhizobium strain, the seeds are exposed to bacteria before 
sowing. Instead of being harvested, the legume crop is often 
plowed under so that it will decompose as “green manure,” 
reducing the need for manufactured fertilizers.
Many plant families besides legumes include species that 
benefit from mutualistic nitrogen fixation. For example, 
red alder (Alnus rubra) trees host nitrogen-fixing actinomy-
cete bacteria. Rice, a crop of great commercial importance, 
benefits indirectly from mutualistic nitrogen fixation. Rice 
farmers culture a free-floating aquatic fern, Azolla, which 
has mutualistic cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen (see the 
bottom of  Figure 37.9). The growing rice eventually shades 
and kills the Azolla, and decomposition of this nitrogen-rich 
organic material increases the rice paddy’s fertility. Ducks 
also eat the Azolla, providing the rice paddy with an extra 
source of manure and providing the rice farmers with a 
source of meat.
Fungi and Plant Nutrition
Certain species of soil fungi also form mutualistic relation-
ships with roots and play a major role in plant nutrition. 
Some of these fungi are endophytic, but the most important 
relationships are mycorrhizae (“fungus roots”), the 
intimate mutualistic associations of roots and fungi (see 
Figure 31.4b). The host plant provides the fungus with a 
steady supply of sugar. Meanwhile, the fungus increases 
the surface area for water uptake and also supplies the plant 
with phosphorus and other minerals absorbed from the soil. 
The fungi of mycorrhizae also secrete growth factors that 
stimulate roots to grow and branch, as well as antibiotics that 
help protect the plant from soil pathogens.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   871 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 873 ===

872 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
the absence of fungal partners. Treating seeds with spores 
of mycorrhizal fungi can help seedlings form mycorrhizae, 
facilitating recovery of damaged natural ecosystems (see 
Concept 55.5) and improving crop yield.
Mycorrhizal associations are also important in under-
standing ecological relationships. Arbuscular mycorrhizae 
fungi exhibit little host specificity; a single fungus may form 
a shared mycorrhizal network with several plants, even plants 
of different species. Mycorrhizal networks in a plant com-
munity may benefit one plant species more than another. 
Other examples of how mycorrhizae may affect the structures 
of plant communities come from studies of introduced plant 
species. For instance, garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), a 
European species that has been introduced into the forests of 
the eastern half of the United States, does not form mycorrhi-
zae but hinders the growth of other plant species by prevent-
ing the growth of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.
Epiphytes, Parasitic Plants,  
and Carnivorous Plants
Almost all plant species have mutualistic relationships with 
soil fungi, bacteria, or both. Some plant species, including 
epiphytes, parasites, and carnivores, have unusual adapta-
tions that facilitate exploiting other organisms (Figure 37.15).
but don’t pierce the plasma membrane. Instead of entering 
the cytoplasm, a hypha grows into a tube formed by invagi-
nation of the root cell’s membrane. This invagination is like 
poking a finger gently into a balloon without popping it; your 
finger is like the fungal hypha, and the balloon skin is like the 
root cell’s membrane. After the hyphae have penetrated in 
this way, some of them branch densely, forming structures 
called arbuscules (“little trees”), which are important sites of 
nutrient transfer between the fungus and the plant. Within 
the hyphae themselves, oval vesicles may form, possibly 
serving as food storage sites for the fungus. Arbuscular mycor-
rhizae are far more common than ectomycorrhizae, being 
found in over 85% of plant species, including most crops. 
About 5% of plant species don’t form mycorrhizal associa-
tions. Figure 37.14 provides an overview of mycorrhizae.
Agricultural and Ecological Importance  
of Mycorrhizae
Good crop yields often depend on the formation of mycorrhi-
zae. Roots can form mycorrhizal symbioses only if exposed to 
the appropriate species of fungus. In most ecosystems, these 
fungi are present in the soil, and seedlings develop mycor-
rhizae. But if crop seeds are collected in one environment and 
planted in foreign soil, the plants may show signs of malnu-
trition (particularly phosphorus deficiency) resulting from 
50 om
1.5 mm
10 om
Mantle
(fungal sheath)
Root 
hair
Fungal
hyphae
Mantle (fungal sheath)Epidermis
(Colorized SEM)
(LM)
(LM)
Cortex
Cortical cell
Ectomycorrhizae. The mantle of 
the fungal mycelium ensheathes 
the root. Fungal hyphae extend 
from the mantle into the soil, 
absorbing water and minerals, 
especially phosphorus. Hyphae 
also extend into the extracellular 
spaces of the root cortex, 
providing extensive surface area 
for nutrient exchange between 
the fungus and its host plant.
Arbuscular mycorrhizae 
(endomycorrhizae). No mantle 
forms around the root, but 
microscopic fungal hyphae extend 
into the root. Within the root 
cortex, the fungus makes 
extensive contact with the plant 
through branching of hyphae that 
form arbuscules, providing an 
enormous surface area for 
nutrient swapping. The hyphae 
penetrate the cell walls, but not 
the plasma membranes, of cells 
within the cortex.
Endodermis
Casparian
strip
Fungal
vesicle
Arbuscules
Plasma
membrane
Epidermal
cell
Endodermis
Fungal
hyphae
between
cortical
cells
Epidermis Cortex
. Figure 37.14 Mycorrhizae.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   872 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 874 ===

/uni25BC Figure 37.15 Exploring Unusual Nutritional Adaptations in Plants
EpiphytesEpiphytes
Parasitic Plants
Carnivorous Plants
c Staghorn fern,
an epiphyte
b Mistletoe, a photosynthetic parasite
m Dodder, a nonphoto-
synthetic parasite (orange)
m Indian pipe, a nonphoto-
synthetic parasite of mycorrhizae
m Sundew
b Pitcher plants
An epiphyte (from the Greek epi, upon, and phyton, plant) is a plant that grows 
on another plant. Epiphytes produce and gather their own nutrients; they 
do not tap into their hosts for sustenance. Usually anchored to the branches 
or trunks of living trees, epiphytes absorb water and minerals from rain, 
mostly through leaves rather than roots. Some examples are staghorn ferns, 
bromeliads, and many orchids, including the vanilla plant.
Unlike epiphytes, parasitic plants absorb water, minerals, 
and sometimes products of photosynthesis from their 
living hosts. Many species have roots that function 
as haustoria, nutrient-absorbing projections that tap
into the host plant. Some parasitic species, such as 
orange-colored, spaghetti-like dodder (genus Cuscuta), 
lack chlorophyll entirely, whereas others, such as 
mistletoe (genus Phoradendron), are photosynthetic. 
Still others, such as Indian pipe (Monotropa uniﬂora), 
absorb nutrients from the hyphae of mycorrhizae 
associated with other plants.
Carnivorous plants are photosynthetic but supplement their mineral diet by capturing 
insects and other small animals. They live in acid bogs and other habitats where soils 
are poor in nitrogen and other minerals. Pitcher plants such as Nepenthes and                
Sarracenia have modiﬁed leaves that form water-ﬁlled funnels into which prey slip and 
drown, eventually to be digested by enzymes. Sundews (genus 
Drosera) exude a sticky ﬂuid from tentacle-like glands on highly 
modiﬁed leaves. Stalked glands secrete sweet mucilage that attracts 
and ensnares insects, and they also release digestive enzymes. Other 
glands then absorb the nutrient “soup.” The highly modiﬁed leaves 
of Venus ﬂytrap (Dionaea muscipula) close quickly but partially 
when a prey hits two trigger hairs in rapid enough succession. 
Smaller insects can escape, but larger ones are trapped by the teeth 
lining the margins of the lobes. Excitation by the prey causes the 
trap to narrow more and digestive enzymes to be released.
. Venus ﬂytraps
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   873 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 875 ===

874 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
A recent study suggests that exploiting other organisms 
may be the norm. Chanyarat Paungfoo-Lonhienne and her 
colleagues at the University of Queensland in Australia have 
provided evidence that Arabidopsis and tomato can take up 
bacteria and yeast into their roots and digest them. Due to the 
small pore size of the cell wall (less than 10 nm) relative to the 
size of bacterial cells (about 1,000 nm), taking in microorgan-
isms may depend on digestion of the cell wall. A study with 
wheat suggests that microorganisms provide only a tiny frac-
tion of the plant’s nitrogen needs, but this may not be true 
for all plants. These findings suggest that many plant species 
might engage in a limited amount of carnivory.
CONCEPT CHECK 37.3
1. Why is the study of the rhizosphere critical to understand-
ing plant nutrition?
2. How do soil bacteria and mycorrhizae contribute to plant 
nutrition?
3. MAKE CONNECTIONS What is a general term that is 
used to describe the strategy of using photosynthesis and 
heterotrophy for nutrition (see Concept 28.1)? What is a 
well-known class of protists that uses this strategy?
4. WHAT IF? A peanut farmer finds that the older leaves of 
his plants are turning yellow following a long period of wet 
weather. Suggest a reason why.
For suggested answers, see Appendix A.
37 Chapter Review
SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
 Go to Mastering Biology for Assignments, the eText, 
the Study Area, and Dynamic Study Modules.
CONCEPT 37.1
Soil contains a living, complex ecosystem (pp. 860–863)
• Soil particles of various sizes derived from the breakdown of rock 
are found in soil. Soil particle size affects the availability of water, 
oxygen, and minerals in the soil.
• A soil’s composition encompasses its inorganic and organic com-
ponents. T opsoil is a complex ecosystem teeming with bacteria, 
fungi, protists, animals, and the roots of plants.
• Some agricultural practices can deplete the mineral content of 
soil, tax water reserves, and promote erosion. The goal of soil 
conservation is to minimize this damage.
? How is soil a complex ecosystem?
CONCEPT 37.2
Plant roots absorb many types of essential elements 
from the soil (pp. 863–866)
• Macronutrients, elements required in relatively large amounts, 
include carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and other major 
ingredients of organic compounds. Micronutrients, elements 
required in very small amounts, typically have catalytic functions 
as cofactors of enzymes.
• Deficiency of a mobile nutrient usually affects older organs more 
than younger ones; the reverse is true for nutrients that are less 
mobile within a plant. Macronutrient deficiencies are most common, 
particularly deficiencies of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium.
• Rather than tailoring the soil to match the plant, genetic engi-
neers are tailoring the plant to match the soil.
? Do plants need soil to grow? Explain.
CONCEPT 37.3
Plant nutrition often involves relationships with other 
organisms (pp. 866–874)
• Rhizobacteria derive their energy from the rhizosphere, a 
microorganism-enriched ecosystem intimately associated with 
roots. Plant secretions support the energy needs of the rhizo-
sphere. Some rhizobacteria produce antibiotics, whereas others 
make nutrients more available for plants. Most are free-living, but 
some live inside plants. Plants satisfy most of their huge need for 
nitrogen from the bacterial decomposition of humus and the 
fixation of gaseous nitrogen.
(to atmosphere)(from atmosphere)
N2 N2 
NH3
(ammonia)
H+
(from soil) 
Nitrifying
bacteria
Nitrifying
bacteria
Weathering of rock
Denitrifying
bacteria
Root
Nitrogen-fixing
bacteria
Ammonifying
bacteria
Microbial
decomposition
Amino acids
Proteins from humus
(dead organic material)
NO3
–
(nitrate)  
NO2
–
(nitrite)  
NH4
+
(ammonium)  
NH4
+
  
• Nitrogen-fixing bacteria convert atmospheric N2 to nitrogenous 
minerals that plants can absorb as a nitrogen source for organic 
synthesis. The most efficient mutualism between plants and 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria occurs in the nodules that are formed 
by Rhizobium bacteria growing in the roots of legumes. These 
bacteria obtain sugar from the plant and supply the plant with 
fixed nitrogen. In agriculture, legume crops are rotated with other 
crops to restore nitrogen to the soil.
• Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations of fungi and roots. 
The fungal hyphae of mycorrhizae absorb water and minerals, 
which they supply to their plant hosts.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   874 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 876 ===

 CHAPTER 37  Plant Nutrition 875
• Epiphytes grow on the surfaces of other plants but acquire water 
and minerals from rain. Parasitic plants absorb nutrients from 
host plants. Carnivorous plants supplement their mineral nutri-
tion by digesting animals.
? Do all plants gain energy directly from photosynthesis? Explain.
TEST YOUR UNDERSTANDING
10. DRAW IT Draw a simple sketch of cation exchange, showing 
a root hair, a soil particle with anions, and a hydrogen ion 
displacing a mineral cation.
11. EVOLUTION CONNECTION Imagine taking the plant out of 
the picture in Figure 37.1 1. Write a paragraph explaining how 
soil bacteria could sustain the recycling of nitrogen before land 
plants evolved.
12. SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY In arid environments, high 
evaporation rates of irrigated surface waters can cause salts to 
accumulate in the topsoil. How do salt concentrations affect 
water uptake in plants? Design an experiment to investigate 
this, and suggest a hypothesis to explain how salts affect 
plant growth.
13. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY Global manure 
production increased by 66% between 1961 and 2016. Manure 
is considered more environment-friendly than synthetic 
chemical fertilizers, but manure is harmful still as it contains 
insidious pollutants, such as heavy metals, pathogenic 
organisms, and antibiotics. Discuss the possible consequences 
of the increased use of manure. What can society and science 
do to help alleviate this problem?
14. WRITE ABOUT A THEME: INTERACTIONS The soil in 
which plants grow teems with organisms from every taxonomic 
kingdom. In a short essay (100–150 words), discuss examples of 
how the mutualistic interactions of plants with bacteria, fungi, 
and animals improve plant nutrition.
Explore Scientific Papers with Science in the Classroom 
How do parasitic plants communicate with their hosts?
Go to “Getting to Know Your Neighbors” 
at www.scienceintheclassroom.org.
 Instructors: Questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology.
15. SYNTHESIZE YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Making a footprint in the soil seems like an insignificant event. 
In a short essay (100–150 words), explain how a footprint 
would affect the properties of the soil and how these changes 
would affect soil organisms and the emergence of seedlings.
For selected answers, see Appendix A.
  Multiple-choice Self-Quiz questions 1–9 can be found in the 
Study Area in Mastering Biology.
URRY1637_12_GE_C37_PRF.indd   875 3/14/20   4:05 AM

=== SIDE 877 ===

Figure 38.1 The orchid Ophrys speculum, shown above, is pollinated only by male 
wasps of the species Dasyscolia ciliata. The flowers resemble the female wasps 
visually and tactilely, and even release a similar scent. Male wasps who attempt to 
mate with the flowers get dusted with pollen (see inset). After the males fly off, they 
often transfer pollen to other Ophrys flowers. As shown in the simplified diagram, 
pollination is critical to sexual reproduction in angiosperms.
Reproduction of  
Flowering Plants38
A pollen grain is transferred
(by an animal, wind, or water) from an anther
to a stigma, where it produces a pollen tube.
When a seed 
germinates, 
the embryo 
develops 
into a 
plant.
The ovary 
becomes a fruit 
containing the seeds. 
Fruits and seeds are 
dispersed by an 
animal, wind, 
or water.
The pollen 
tube delivers 
sperm to an 
ovule, which 
contains an egg. 
The egg is fertilized 
by a sperm.
The ovule 
becomes a seed 
containing an 
embryo and 
food supply.
Pollen grain
Anther
Stigma
Pollen tube
OvuleOvary
Fruit
Seed
Sperm
How do angiosperms reproduce sexually?
 Go to Mastering Biology
For Students (in Study Area)
• Get Ready for Chapter 38
• Figure 38.6 Walkthrough: The Life Cycle 
of Angiosperms 
• Animation: Angiosperm Life Cycle
For Instructors to Assign (in Item Library)
• Tutorial: Angiosperm Life Cycle
• Scientific Skills Exercise: Using Positive 
and Negative Numbers to Interpret Data
38.1 Flowers, double fertilization, 
and fruits are key features of the 
angiosperm life cycle p. 877
38.2 Flowering plants reproduce 
sexually, asexually, or both p. 887
38.3 People modify crops by breeding 
and genetic engineering p. 890
KEY CONCEPTS
Study Tip
Make a flowchart: Complete the steps 
in the following flowchart to compare 
angiosperm sexual reproduction with 
human reproduction.
Meiosis occurs in
Meiosis produces
Diploid embryo
Sexual reproduction in
angiosperms
Meiosis occurs in
Meiosis produces
Diploid embryo
Human
reproduction
876
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   876 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 878 ===

 CHAPTER 38  Reproduction of Flowering Plants  877
than the gametophyte. The key traits of the angiosperm life 
cycle can be remembered as the “three Fs”—f lowers, double 
fertilization, and fruits. We’ll begin with flowers.
Flower Structure and Function
In angiosperms, the flower is the sporophytic structure spe-
cialized for sexual reproduction. A flower is typically composed 
of four types of floral organs: carpels, stamens, petals, and 
sepals (Figure 38.2). When viewed from above, these organs 
take the form of concentric whorls. Carpels form the first 
(innermost) whorl, stamens the second, petals the third, and 
sepals the fourth (outermost) whorl. All are attached to a part 
of the stem called the receptacle. Flowers are determinate 
shoots; they cease growing after the flower and fruit are formed.
Carpels and stamens are sporophylls—modified leaves 
specialized for reproduction (see Concept 30.1); sepals and 
petals are sterile modified leaves. A carpel (megasporophyll) 
has an ovary at its base and a long, slender neck called the 
style. At the top of the style is a sticky structure called the 
stigma that captures pollen. Within the ovary are one or 
more ovules, which become seeds if fertilized; the number of 
ovules depends on the species. The flower in Figure 38.2 has a 
single carpel, but many species have multiple carpels. In most 
species, the carpels are fused, resulting in a compound ovary 
with two or more chambers, each containing one or more 
ovules. The term pistil is sometimes used to refer to a single 
carpel or two or more fused carpels (Figure 38.3). A stamen 
(microsporophyll) consists of a stalk called the filament and 
a terminal structure called the anther; within the anther are 
chambers called microsporangia (pollen sacs) that produce 
In Chapters 29 and 30, we approached plant reproduction 
from an evolutionary perspective, tracing the descent of 
plants from algal ancestors. Because angiosperms are the most 
important group of plants in most terrestrial ecosystems, we’ll 
examine their reproductive biology, both sexual and asexual, 
in detail in this chapter. The importance of angiosperm repro-
duction, however, is not limited to natural ecosystems: the 
cultivation of angiosperms forms the basis for much of agri-
culture. For over 10,000 years, plant breeders have genetically 
manipulated the traits of a few hundred wild angiosperm spe-
cies by artificial selection, transforming them into the crops 
we grow today. In recent decades, genetic engineering has 
dramatically increased the variety of ways and the speed with 
which we can modify plants, but many controversies have 
followed in the wake of this new biotechnology.
StamenAnther
Filament
Single carpel
(Simple pistil)
Stigma
Style
Ovary
Sepal
Petal
Ovule
Receptacle
. Figure 38.2 The structure of an idealized flower.
Ovule
Cross section of
simple ovary
Cross section of
compound ovary,
showing one
chamber from
each carpel
Ovule
Two variations of fused carpels
(compound pistil)
Multiple stigmas
(one stigma from
each carpel)
Lobed stigma
(one lobe from
each carpel)
Multiple unfused 
carpels (simple pistils)
Single unfused carpel
(simple pistil)
. Figure 38.3 The relationship between the terms carpel 
and pistil. A simple pistil consists of a single, unfused carpel. A 
compound pistil consists of two or more fused carpels. Some types 
of flowers have only a single pistil, while other types have many 
pistils. In either case, the pistils may be simple or compound.
CONCEPT 38.1
Flowers, double fertilization,  
and fruits are key features  
of the angiosperm life cycle
The life cycles of all plants are characterized by an alternation 
of generations, in which multicellular haploid (n) and 
multicellular diploid (2n) generations alternately pro-
duce each other (see Figure 13.6b). The diploid plant, the 
sporophyte, produces haploid spores by meiosis. These spores 
divide by mitosis, giving rise to multicellular gametophytes, 
the male and female haploid plants that produce gametes 
(sperm and eggs). Fertilization, the fusion of gametes, results 
in a diploid zygote, which divides by mitosis and forms a new 
sporophyte. In angiosperms, the sporophyte is the dominant 
generation: It is larger, more conspicuous, and longer-lived 
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   877 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 879 ===

878 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
are sterile, lacking functional stamens and carpels; others 
are unisexual (sometimes called imperfect), lacking either 
stamens or carpels. Flowers also vary in size, shape, color, 
odor, organ arrangement, and time of opening. Some are 
borne singly, while others are arranged in showy clusters 
called inflorescences. For example, a sunflower consists 
of a central disk composed of hundreds of tiny incomplete 
flowers, surrounded by sterile, incomplete flowers that look 
pollen. Petals are typically more brightly colored than sepals 
and advertise the flower to insects and other animal pollina-
tors. Sepals, which enclose and protect unopened floral buds, 
usually resemble leaves more than the other floral organs do.
Complete flowers have all four basic floral organs 
(see Figure 38.2). Some species have incomplete flowers, 
lacking sepals, petals, stamens, or carpels. For example, 
most grass flowers lack petals. Some incomplete flowers 
Most angiosperm species rely on a living (biotic) or nonliving (abiotic) pollinating 
agent that can move pollen from the anther of a flower on one plant to the 
stigma of a flower on another plant. Approximately 80% of all angiosperm 
pollination is biotic, employing animal go-betweens. Among abiotically pollinated 
species, 98% rely on wind and 2% on water. (Some angiosperm species can 
self-pollinate, but such species are limited to inbreeding in nature.)
About 20% of all angiosperm species are 
wind-pollinated. Since their reproduc-
tive success does not depend on 
attracting pollinators, there has been no 
selective pressure favoring colorful or 
scented flowers. Accordingly, the flowers 
of wind-pollinated species are often 
small, green, and inconspicuous, and 
they produce neither scent nor the 
sugary solution called nectar. Most 
temperate trees and grasses are wind-
pollinated. The flowers of hazel (Corylus 
avellana) and many other temperate, 
wind-pollinated trees appear in the 
early spring, when there are no leaves 
to interfere with pollen movement. 
The relative inefficiency of wind 
pollination is compensated for by 
production of copious amounts of 
pollen grains. Wind tunnel studies 
reveal that wind pollination is often 
more efficient than it appears because 
floral structures can create eddy 
currents that aid in pollen capture.
Abiotic Pollination by Wind
Pollination by Moths and Butterflies
About 65% of all flowering plants 
require insects for pollination; the 
percentage is even greater for major 
crops. Bees are the most important 
insect pollinators, and there is great 
concern in Europe and North 
America that honeybee populations 
have shrunk. Pollinating bees 
depend on nectar and pollen for 
food. Typically, bee-pollinated 
flowers have a delicate, sweet 
fragrance. Bees are attracted to bright 
colors, primarily yellow and blue. Red 
appears dull to them, but they can see 
ultraviolet radiation. Many species of 
bee-pollinated flowers, such as the 
common dandelion (Taraxacum 
vulgare), have ultraviolet markings 
called “nectar guides” that help 
insects locate the nectaries (nectar-
producing glands) but are only visible 
to human eyes under ultraviolet light.
Pollination by Bees
m Hazel staminate
flowers (stamens only)
releasing clouds of pollen
m Hazel carpellate
flower (carpels only)
m Moth on yucca flower
Anther
Moth
Stigma
m Common dandelion under
    normal light
m Common dandelion under 
ultraviolet light
Moths and butterflies detect odors, and 
the flowers they pollinate are often 
sweetly fragrant. Butterflies perceive 
many bright colors, but moth-pollinated 
flowers are usually white or yellow, 
which stand out at night when moths 
are active. A yucca plant (shown here) is 
typically pollinated by a single species 
of moth with appendages that pack 
pollen onto the stigma. The moth then 
deposits eggs directly into the ovary. The 
larvae eat some developing seeds, but this 
cost is outweighed by the benefit of an 
efficient and reliable pollinator. If a moth 
deposits too many eggs, the flower aborts 
and drops off, selecting against individuals 
that overexploit the plant.
/uni25BC Figure 38.4  Exploring Flower Pollination
 Mastering Biology  
Video: Bee Colony Decline
? What are the benefits and dangers to a plant 
of having a highly specific animal pollinator?
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   878 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 880 ===

water, or animals (Figure 38.4). In wind-pollinated species, 
including grasses and many trees, the release of clouds of 
typically small-sized pollen compensates for the random-
ness of dispersal by the wind. At certain times of the year, 
the air is loaded with pollen grains, as anyone plagued with 
pollen allergies can attest. Some species of aquatic plants rely 
on water to disperse pollen. Most angiosperm species, how-
ever, depend on insects, birds, or other animal pollinators to 
transfer pollen directly from one flower to another.
EVOLUTION Animal pollinators are drawn to flowers for the 
food they provide in the form of pollen and nectar. Attracting 
pollinators that are loyal to a given plant species is an efficient 
way to ensure that pollen is transferred to another flower of 
the same species. Natural selection, therefore, favors devia-
tions in floral structure or physiology that make it more likely 
for a flower to be pollinated regularly by an effective animal 
species. If a plant species develops traits that make its flowers 
more prized by pollinators, there is a selective pressure for pol-
linators to become adept at harvesting food from these flowers. 
The joint evolution of two interacting species, each in response 
to selection imposed by the other, is called coevolution. For 
example, some species have fused flower petals that form long, 
tubelike structures bearing nectaries tucked deep inside. Charles 
Darwin suggested that coadaptations between flower and insect 
might lead to correspondences between the length of a floral 
tube and the length of an insect’s proboscis, a straw-like mouth-
part. Based on the length of a long, tubular flower endemic to 
Madagascar, Darwin predicted the existence of a pollinating 
moth with a 28-cm-long proboscis. Such a moth was discovered 
two decades after Darwin’s death (Figure 38.5).
Climate change may be affecting long-standing relation-
ships between plants and animal pollinators. For example, flow-
ers that require long-tongued pollinators have declined under 
the warmer conditions in the Rocky Mountains. As a result, 
there has been selective pressure favoring bumblebees 
like yellow petals (see Figure 40.23). Much of floral diversity 
 represents adaptation to specific pollinators.
Methods of Pollination
Pollination is the transfer of pollen to the ovule-bearing 
structure of a seed plant. In angiosperms, this transfer is 
from an anther to a stigma. Pollination can occur by wind, 
. Figure 38.5 Coevolution of a flower and 
an insect pollinator. The long floral tube 
of the Madagascar orchid Angraecum 
sesquipedale has coevolved with the 
28-cm-long proboscis of its pollinator, 
the hawk moth Xanthopan morganii 
praedicta. The moth is named in 
honor of Darwin’s prediction of 
its existence.
Pollination by Bats
Bird-pollinated flowers, such as columbine flowers, are usually large 
and bright red or yellow, but they have little odor. Since birds often 
do not have a well-developed sense of smell, there has been no 
selective pressure favoring scent production. However, the flowers 
produce the sugary nectar that helps meet the high energy demands 
of the pollinating birds. The primary function of nectar, which is 
produced by nectaries at the base of many flowers, is to “reward” 
the pollinator. The petals of such flowers are often fused, forming a 
bent floral tube that fits the curved beak of the bird.
Pollination by Birds
m Long-nosed bat feeding
on agave flowers at night
Many fly-pollinated flowers 
are reddish and fleshy, with 
an odor like rotten meat. 
Blowflies visiting carrion 
flowers (Stapelia species) 
mistake the flower for a 
rotting corpse and lay their 
eggs on it. In the process, the 
blowflies become dusted with 
pollen that they carry to other 
flowers. When the eggs hatch, 
the larvae find no carrion to eat 
and die.
Pollination by Flies
Blowfly
m Blowfly on carrion flower
Bat-pollinated flowers, like moth-pollinated flowers, are light-
colored and aromatic, attracting their nocturnal 
pollinators. The lesser 
long-nosed bat (Lepto-
nycteris curasoae yerbabue-
nae) feeds on the nectar 
and pollen of agave and 
cactus flowers in the 
southwestern United States 
and Mexico. In feeding, 
the bats transfer pollen 
from plant to plant. 
Long-nosed bats are an 
endangered species.
c Hummingbird 
drinking nectar 
of columbine 
flower
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   879 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 881 ===

880 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
male gametophyte consisting of only two cells: the generative 
cell and the tube cell. Together, these two cells and the spore 
wall constitute a pollen grain. The spore wall, which consists 
of material produced by both the microspore and the anther, 
usually exhibits an elaborate pattern unique to the species. 
During maturation of the male gametophyte, the generative cell 
passes into the tube cell: The tube cell now has a completely free-
standing cell inside it.
Sperm Delivery by Pollen Tubes
After the microsporangium breaks open and releases pollen, a pol-
len grain may be transferred to a receptive surface of a stigma—
the act of pollination. There, it absorbs water and germinates by 
producing a pollen tube, a long cellular protuberance that deliv-
ers sperm to the female gametophyte. 
A pollen grain typically consists of the spore wall and two cells: 
a tube cell and a second cell, the generative cell, contained within 
the tube cell. As the pollen tube elongates through the style, the 
nucleus of the generative cell divides by mitosis and produces 
two sperm, which remain inside the tube cell. The tube nucleus 
leads ahead of the two sperm as the pollen tube grows toward the 
micropyle in response to chemical attractants produced by the 
synergid cells. The arrival of the pollen tube initiates the death of 
one of the two synergids, thereby providing a passageway into the 
embryo sac. The two sperm are then released from the pollen tube 
4 in the vicinity of the female gametophyte.
Double Fertilization
Fertilization, the fusion of gametes, occurs after the two sperm 
reach the female gametophyte. One sperm fertilizes the egg, 
forming the zygote. The other sperm combines with the two 
polar nuclei, forming a triploid (3n) nucleus in the center of the 
large central cell of the female gametophyte. This cell will give 
rise to the endosperm, a multicellular, food-storing tissue of the 
seed. 5 The union of the two sperm cells with different nuclei 
of the female gametophyte is called double fertilization. 
Double fertilization ensures that endosperm develops only in 
ovules where the egg has been fertilized, thereby preventing 
angiosperms from squandering nutrients on infertile ovules. 
Near the time of double fertilization, the tube nucleus, the other 
synergid cell, and the antipodal cells degenerate.
Seed Development
6 After double fertilization, each ovule develops into a seed. 
Meanwhile, the ovary develops into a fruit, which encloses 
the seeds and aids in their dispersal by wind or animals. 
As the sporophyte embryo develops from the zygote, the 
seed stockpiles proteins, oils, and starch to varying degrees, 
depending on the species. This is why seeds are such a major 
nutrient drain. Initially, carbohydrates and other nutrients 
are stored in the seed’s endosperm, but later, depending 
on the species, the swelling cotyledons (seed leaves) of the 
embryo may take over this function. When a seed germinates, 
7 the embryo develops into a new sporophyte. The mature 
with shorter tongues. Two species of Rocky Mountain bumble-
bees now have tongues that are about one-quarter shorter than 
those of bees of the same species 40 years ago.
The Angiosperm Life Cycle: An Overview
Pollination is one step in the angiosperm life cycle. Figure 38.6 
provides a complete overview of the life cycle, focusing on 
gametophyte development, sperm delivery by pollen tubes, 
double fertilization, and seed development.
Over the course of seed plant evolution, gametophytes 
became reduced in size and wholly dependent on the sporo-
phyte for nutrients (see Figure 30.2). The gametophytes of 
angiosperms are the most reduced of all plants, consisting of 
only a few cells: They are microscopic, and their development 
is obscured by protective tissues.
Development of Female Gametophytes 
(Embryo Sacs)
As a carpel develops, one or more ovules form deep within its 
ovary, its swollen base. A female gametophyte, also known as an 
embryo sac, develops inside each ovule. The process of embryo 
sac formation occurs in a tissue called the megasporangium 1 
within each ovule. Two integuments (layers of protective spo-
rophytic tissue that will develop into the seed coat) surround 
each megasporangium, except at a gap called the micropyle. 
Female gametophyte development begins when one cell in the 
megasporangium of each ovule, the megasporocyte, enlarges 
and undergoes meiosis, producing four haploid megaspores. 
Usually only one megaspore survives; the other three degenerate.
The nucleus of the surviving megaspore divides by mitosis 
three times without cytokinesis, resulting in one large cell with 
eight haploid nuclei. The multinucleate mass is then divided 
by membranes to form the embryo sac. Near the micropyle 
of the embryo sac, two synergid cells flank the egg and help 
attract and guide the pollen tube to the embryo sac. At the 
opposite end of the embryo sac are three antipodal cells of 
unknown function. The other two nuclei, called polar nuclei, 
are not partitioned into separate cells but share the cytoplasm 
of the large central cell of the embryo sac. The mature embryo 
sac thus consists of eight nuclei contained within seven cells. 
The ovule, which will become a seed if fertilized, now consists 
of the embryo sac, enclosed by the megasporangium (which 
eventually withers) and two surrounding integuments.
Development of Male Gametophytes  
in Pollen Grains
As the stamens are produced, each anther 2 develops four micro-
sporangia, also called pollen sacs. Within the microsporangia are 
many diploid cells called microsporocytes. Each microsporocyte 
undergoes meiosis, forming four haploid microspores, 3 each 
of which eventually gives rise to a haploid male gametophyte. 
Each microspore then undergoes mitosis, producing a haploid 
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   880 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 882 ===

 CHAPTER 38  Reproduction of Flowering Plants  881
100 om
75 om
Haploid (n)
Key
Diploid (2n)
MEIOSIS
FERTILIZATION
MEIOSIS
      When a seed
germinates, the
embryo develops
into a mature
sporophyte.
7
      The zygote
develops into an
embryo that is
packaged along
with food into a
seed. (The fruit
tissues surround-
ing the seed are
not shown.)
6
Microsporangia
(pollen sacs)
Microsporocyte (2n)
Generative cell
Tube cell
Tube nucleus
Pollen
grains
Stigma
Pollen
tube
Tube
nucleus
Sperm
Style
Polar nuclei
in central cell
Egg cell (n)
Female gametophyte
(embryo sac)
Four
megaspores
(n)
Integuments
Micropyle
Ovule with
megasporangium 
                     (2n)
Ovary
Germinating
seed
Embryo (2n) 
Endosperm (3n)
Seed coat (2n)
Nucleus of
developing
endosperm
(3n)
Zygote (2n)
Seed
Stamen
(microsporophyll)
Carpel
(megasporophyll)
Discharged sperm nuclei (n)
Megasporangium
(2n)
Female
gametophyte
(LM)
Male
gametophyte
(LM)
Mature flower on
sporophyte plant
(2n)
Egg
nucleus (n)
Male gametophyte (n)
(in pollen grain)
Synergid cells
Antipodal cells
2
     A microspore develops
into a pollen grain. The gen-
erative cell of the gameto-
phyte will divide, forming
two sperm. The tube cell
will produce the pollen tube.
3 
     In the megasporan-
gium of each ovule, the
megasporocyte divides
by meiosis, producing
four megaspores. Usually 
only one survives. It 
undergoes three mitotic
divisions and produces a 
female gametophyte.
1
     Double fertilization occurs. One 
sperm fertilizes the egg, forming a 
zygote. The other sperm fertilizes the
central cell, forming the endosperm
(a food supply, 3n in this example).
5
      Each pollen tube
elongates through
the style. When
reaching an ovule,
it discharges its 
two sperm.
4
     In the anther of a stamen, each microsporangium 
contains many microsporocytes. Each microsporocyte 
divides by meiosis, producing four microspores.
Four microspores (n)
Microspore (n)
. Figure 38.6 The life cycle of an angiosperm. For simplicity, a flower with a single carpel 
(simple pistil) is shown. Many species have multiple carpels, either separate or fused.
VISUAL SKILLS  M i t o s i s  c o n t i n u e s  t h r o u g h o u t  t h e  l i f e  c y c l e .  W h e r e  i n  t h e  c y c l e  w o u l d  t h e  m o s t  m i t o t i c  d i v i s i o n s  o c c u r ?
 Mastering Biology Figure Walkthrough  
Animation: Angiosperm Life Cycle  
Animation: Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   881 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 883 ===

882 UNIT SIX  Plants: Structure and Function
Structure of the Mature Seed
During the last stages of its maturation, the seed dehydrates 
until its water content is only about 5–15% of its weight. The 
embryo, which is surrounded by a food supply (cotyledons, 
endosperm, or both), enters dormancy; that is, it stops 
growing and its metabolism nearly ceases. The embryo and 
its food supply are enclosed by a hard, protective seed coat 
formed from the integuments of the ovule. In some species, 
dormancy is imposed by the presence of an intact seed coat 
rather than by the embryo itself.
If you split apart a seed of the garden bean, a type of 
eudicot, you can see that the embryo consists of an elongate 
sporophyte produces its own flowers and fruits: The life cycle 
is now complete, but it is necessary to examine more closely 
how an ovule develops into a mature seed.
Seed Development and Structure
After successful pollination and double fertilization, a seed 
begins to form. During this process, both the endosperm and 
the embryo develop. When mature, a seed consists of a dor-
mant embryo surrounded by stored food and protective layers.
Endosperm Development
Endosperm usually begins development before the embryo 
does. After double fertilization, the triploid nucleus of the 
ovule’s central cell divides mitotically, forming a multinucle-
ate “supercell” that has a milky consistency. This liquid mass, 
the endosperm, becomes multicellular when cytokinesis 
partitions the cytoplasm by forming membranes between the 
nuclei. Eventually, these “naked” cells produce cell walls, and 
the endosperm becomes solid. Coconut “milk” and “meat” 
are examples of liquid and solid endosperm. The white fluffy 
part of popcorn is another example of endosperm. The endo-
sperms of just three grains—wheat, maize, and rice—provide 
much of the food energy for human sustenance.
In grains and most other species of monocots, as well as 
many eudicots, the endosperm stores nutrients that can be 
used by the seedling after germination. In other eudicot seeds, 
the food reserves of the endosperm are completely exported 
to the cotyledons before the seed completes its development; 
consequently, the mature seed lacks endosperm.
Embryo Development
The first mitotic division of the zygote is asymmetrical and 
splits the fertilized egg into a basal cell and a terminal cell 
(Figure 38.7). The terminal cell eventually gives rise to most 
of the embryo. The basal cell continues to divide, producing a 
thread of cells called the suspensor, which anchors the embryo 
to the parent plant. The suspensor helps in transferring nutrients 
to the embryo from the parent plant and, in some species, from 
the endosperm. As the suspensor elongates, it pushes the embryo 
deeper into the nutritive and protective tissues. Meanwhile, the 
terminal cell divides several times and then forms a spherical 
proembryo (early embryo) that is attached to the suspensor. The 
cotyledons begin to form as bumps on the proembryo. A eudicot 
embryo, with its two cotyledons, is heart-shaped at this stage of 
development.
Soon after the rudimentary cotyledons appear, the embryo 
elongates. Cradled between the two cotyledons is the embry-
onic shoot apex. At the opposite end of the embryo’s axis, 
where the suspensor attaches, an embryonic root apex forms. 
After the seed germinates—indeed, for the rest of the plant’s 
life—the apical meristems at the apices of shoots and roots 
sustain primary growth (see Figure 35.11).
Zygote
Ovule
Endosperm
nucleus
Terminal cell
Integuments
Zygote
Basal cell
Proembryo
Suspensor
Cotyledons
Seed coat
(from integuments)
Shoot
apex
Root
apex
Suspensor Endosperm
Basal cell
. Figure 38.7 The development of a eudicot plant embryo. 
By the time the ovule becomes a mature seed and the integuments 
harden and thicken into the seed coat, the zygote has given rise to 
an embryonic plant with rudimentary organs.
 Mastering Biology Animation: Embryo and Endosperm 
Development
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   882 3/14/20   4:08 AM

=== SIDE 884 ===

 CHAPTER 38  Reproduction of Flowering Plants  883
tract and thus are usually  carried a long distance before 
germinating from feces.
The length of time a dormant seed remains viable and 
capable of germinating varies from a few days to decades or 
even longer, depending on the plant species and environ-
mental conditions. The oldest carbon-14-dated seed that has 
grown into a viable plant was a 2,000-year-old date palm seed 
from Israel. Most seeds are durable enough to last a year or 
two until conditions are favorable for germinating. Thus, the 
soil has a bank of ungerminated seeds that may have accumu-
lated for several years. This is one reason vegetation reappears 
so rapidly after an environmental disruption such as fire.
Sporophyte Development  
from Seed to Mature Plant
When environmental conditions are conducive for 
growth, seed dormancy is lost and germination proceeds. 
Germination is followed by growth of stems, leaves, and 
roots, and eventually by flowering.
Seed Germination
Seed germination is initiated by imbibition, the uptake 
of water due to the low water potential of the dry seed. 
Imbibition causes the seed to expand and rupture its coat 
and triggers changes in the embryo that enable it to resume 
growth. Following hydration, enzymes digest the storage 
materials of the endosperm or cotyledons, and the nutrients 
are transferred to the growing regions of the embryo.
structure, the embryonic axis, attached to two thick, fleshy 
cotyledons (Figure 38.8a). Below where the cotyledons are 
attached, the embryonic axis is called the hypocotyl (from 
the Greek hypo, under). The hypocotyl terminates in the 
radicle, or embryonic root. The portion of the embryonic 
axis above where the cotyledons are attached and below the 
first pair of miniature leaves is the epicotyl (from the Greek 
epi, on, over). The epicotyl, young leaves, and shoot apical 
meristem are collectively called the plumule.
The cotyledons of the common garden bean are packed 
with starch before the seed germinates because they absorbed 
carbohydrates from the endosperm when the seed was devel-
oping. However, the seeds of some eudicot species, such as 
castor beans (Ricinus communis), retain their food supply in 
the endosperm and have very thin cotyledons. The cotyle-
dons absorb nutrients from the endosperm and transfer them 
to the rest of the embryo when the seed germinates.
The embryos of monocots possess only a single cotyledon 
(Figure 38.8b). Grasses, including maize and wheat, have 
a specialized cotyledon called a scutellum (from the Latin 
scutella, small shield, a reference to its shape). The scutellum, 
which has a large surface area, is pressed against the endo-
sperm, from which it absorbs nutrients during germination. 
The embryo of a grass seed is enclosed within two protective 
sheathes: a coleoptile, which covers the young shoot, and 
a coleorhiza, which covers the young root. Both structures 
aid in soil penetration after germination.
Seed Dormancy: An Adaptation for Tough Times
The environmental conditions required to break seed dor-
mancy vary among species. Some seed types germinate as 
soon as they are in a suitable environment. Others remain 
dormant, even if sown in a favorable place, until a specific 
environmental cue causes them to break dormancy.
The requirement for specific cues to break seed dormancy 
increases the chances that germination will occur at a time 
and place most advantageous to the seedling. The seeds of 
many desert plants, for instance, germinate only after a sub-
stantial rainfall. If they were to germinate after a mild drizzle, 
the soil might soon become too dry to support the seedlings. 
Where natural fires are common, many seeds require intense 
heat or smoke to break dormancy; seedlings are therefore 
most abundant after fire has cleared away competing vegeta-
tion. Where winters are harsh, seeds may require extended 
exposure to cold before they germinate; seeds sown during 
summer or fall will therefore not germinate until the follow-
ing spring, ensuring a long growth season before the next 
winter. Many small seeds require light for germination, an 
adaptation that prevents them from germinating when they 
are buried so deeply in the soil that their energy reserves 
would be exhausted before their plumules could reach 
sunlight. Some seeds have coats that must be weakened by 
chemical attack as they pass through an animal’s digestive 
MAKE CONNECTIONS In addition to cotyledon number, how do the 
structures of monocots and eudicots differ? (See Figure 30.16.)
VISUAL SKILLS Which mature seed lacks an endosperm? What 
happened to it?
Seed coat
Radicle
Cotyledons
Hypocotyl
Epicotyl
(a) Common garden bean, a eudicot with thick cotyledons. The
      fleshy cotyledons store food absorbed from the endosperm before 
      the seed germinates.
(b) Maize, a monocot. Like all monocots, maize has only one
     cotyledon. Maize and other grasses have a large cotyledon called a
     scutellum. The rudimentary shoot is sheathed in a structure called
     the coleoptile, and the coleorhiza covers the young root.
Scutellum
(cotyledon)
Coleoptile
Radicle
Coleorhiza
Hypocotyl
Epicotyl
Endosperm
Pericarp fused
with seed coat
. Figure 38.8 Seed structure.
URRY1637_12_GE_C38_PRF.indd   883 3/14/20   4:08 AM